
I
A
# x>
■<
*■' ,X *-* *"--#W ?* X^. T
f - >/ £*--?- -~ ' .. X- -" ~
r
*
XX > --XXX"'-'
->*.
0
f
&
-3?
:V"
*
!4. :
%■
V
O
~: - %,
*
.V^-O x v^ f^ -^
:^-
v
W£
v
r%
y<#
r
V
/
** - s
a;
-4"
"*
."* <
V
.*
/
J<
*
v:
; va ' v " v
%
/
X"
•■&-.
m-
•$
I
*
<!£
-m
:*cft
* ./kv
M f %
*.X-:' "^
I
{
'&
i
.*•
M
-%
%
:t
*r
¥m
-* 1
«
i
*.
" V2s3K
H
V
4
:*
; r '-_■ ~ . ~ - " * X *; rx .
a
\V*
\X^\ r^ t -•**-
?
■it
N.B. Copies can be had on application at the Office of the Stop-the-War-Committee,
Cfockhouse, Arundel street Strand. London. W£.
The Struggle of the
Dutch Republics. .
A GREAT CRIME.
(An appeal to the conscience of the British Nation.)
by
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN,
Editor of „HET ALGEMEEN HANDELSBLAD."
„HANDELSBLAD" OFFICE. '
AMSTERDAM.
i
wsm
§$—- -' "■"■"•■ " " "■'*■" '"■-"■'■ T * ""■ "■'■'■""-' ■' -•■-•"•-""-'•" -*-"v\ '1
sup-..
llis is a reprint of the article published in the %
of 11 November 1900. J
itex
x ;i y ( ;,n
% : s\r-:\
>
-^ff*~ In January of this year was published: >:^
P Open letter to the Duke of Devonshire J
Lv;
FROM
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN x
&HTOR of „Hbt Algemeen Handelsblad".
~§f-t z - iiT.^
and in June
fThe Struggle of the Dutch Republics. ;
A (Open letter to an American Lady)
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN ''^tfjB
HflBpi*?*f~~ Editor of ,,Het Algemeen Handelsblad". .
are reprints of articles published in English it i;
~ f §SLV- the ?f Handelsblad". . Jl
" ~v*-.
*' s :"^
They can be ordered through any Bookseller^ or obtained from a|
fte Publisher, Algemeen Handelsblad Office, N\ Z. Voorburgwal,
Amsterdam.
**- -^*&i£~0s -ax-P^^x* \ ' »> - -: -5
%* r *&rjfc$£ 1 " lr ' -
» s .
*<X,. t ~**- V f\ i
>
■^t
- Vv xt~
7k, ftfL-^fccW <^w '
The struggle of the Dutch Republics.
in
A GREAT CRIME.
."X
(An appeal to the conscience of tlie British Nation.)
"v*
And Pharaoh said: „ Who is the Lord
thath I should obey His voice?
„I know not the Lord, neither will I
let Israel go".
How difficult it is to show sufficient selfcontrol, when
standing with bound hands, incapable to interfere,
near a cruelly murdered nation, while witnessing the
ghastliest forms of injustice and untruth!
But there is always danger that in the extravagant
words of outraged feeling strength may evaporate. So
self control is imperative, as strength is wanted for the
future. To a great poet or orator I leave the task to
express with the fervour of a Milton or Wordsworth the
horror and the wrath, kindled in the hearts of all men,
who love righteousness and believe in God and liberty,
by this utterly vile war in South-Africa and by the temporary
success of the Rhodesians and of the press and
the Statesmen, who bear their yoke.
Whilst leaving to poets the use of their noble gift to
this noble end, I make an appeal to the conscience of
the English people, while it is still time to save a nation
of freemen from annihilation. But you must testify at
once if you would testify at all, for opportunities pass
away^rom you.
/
%
x*xx
x~-
-r^v- -VAC;^ A^H : xWf* A^A •." **, - ; ,*-•*• A ; -:
4SS#^fe&^^v^,P^'
Bat I will speak openly and without reserve, for a
journalist may press his own convictions with bis whole
might and all possible force of argument, while statesmen,
whose action involves the whole country, have to be silent.
And I will not speak as one without hope in the future.
For I am not thoroughly broken yet by disappointment
I absolutely refuse to believe that the austere
and ardent spiritualism of the Puritan is dead in England
.... I still believe in the thousands of Englishmen
and women, who want liberty to be cherished and preserved
.... I believe in the love for high principle of
the massive remains of the people of Bright and Gladstone,
in their breadth of view and their liberal judgment, in
their fairness and in their awe for moral law — God's
revelation!
I know how little chance I have to be heard by the
majority! ■
The British Jingo would rather burst in ignorance than
allow himself to be approached by a foreigner, who
acknowledges with a smile and a tear, that he is a
„pro-Boer tf that he is one in soul and heart with the
men and women of French-Dutch descent, who are killed
or enslaved on the field they conquered in a stern struggle
with impossibility.
I know that it is inpracticable as yet to appeal to those
who „see red a , intoxicated as they are by the war spirit. . .
that it is useless to address myself to those who are
effeminate by their neutrality and indifference, but I
know also that the old Britsh national character still
lives in a minority, that looks with horror and disdain
at the sordid pride and selfishness of the ungenerous
plutocracy of international capitalists that fomented
this war.
* *
For that the war has been caused by financial intrigue
is now known the whole world over!
It has now been proven to the hilt that the grievances
of the Outlanders were wildly exaggerated that the
agitation, particularly so far as the press was concerned,
was largely the work of the financiers, who had previously
organised the Johannesburg conspiracy, and who,
as their chief has subsequently confessed, regarded the
British flag as „the greatest of commercial assets' 7 !
Mr. Hobson, who for the Manchester Guardian carefully
investigated the political position on the Rand, and whose
verdict can be read in his crystal-clear book "The War 
in South Africa", predicted that the annexation of the
Transvaal, far from benefiting the white workman or the
Kaffir, would place in power this same ring of financiers,
whose primary object would be, first, to destroy competition
and establish a monopoly of the gold industry, and
then to beat down wages by the wholesale importation
of native labour.
Mr. Hobson summed up the whole case in these words:
— " We are fighting in order to place a small international
oligarchy of mineowners and speculators in power at
Pretoria"
And now eighteen months after the agitation began,
it has been proved how right he was!
We have received from Capetown the "Protest of the
Refugee Committee, Cape Town, against Capitalist Legislation".

In this pamphlet the Outlanders petition to be saved
from their deliverers. Their grievances before the war
seem slight by comparison with the grievances which
the settlement threatens.
They declare that the administration of the Transvaal
is being worked by and in the interest of the financiers.
They italicise Mr. Hobson's statement that the Eckstein
group has already formed the nucleus of "a monopoly
which may become to the Rand what De Beers has been
for some years to Kimberley". They similarly emphasise
Mr. Hobson's statement that "the industrial and agricultural
future of the Transvaal is already hypothecated to
this small ring of financial foreigners", and his prophecy
that "when the British arms have established firm order
this foreign host will return with enhanced numbers and
increased power", and that they will "add to their other
businesses the business of politics".
The enormous political power exercised by these men
arises, the committee says, from the facts that they are
the largest employers of labour, command unlimited
wealth, and "control the leading organs of the press".
The authors ot this Protest of the Refugee Committee
are all men of substance at the Rand, and the Committee
was appointed at a general meeting of the Outlander
refugees lately held in Capetown.
Pretoria had barely fallen, it is pointed out by them,
before Lord Roberts and the military Governor ol the
Rand were surrounded by an atmosphere of "interests,"
and the most responsible civil positions in the country
were filled by former representatives of the interested
financial corporations. These men, by virtue of their new
offices, became armed with extensive powers for prying
into the private financial affairs of the absent community.
The cases are instanced ot "the individual in charge of
the money-lending departement of Barnato's Consolidated
Company who was installed as Financial Adviser ; a director
of the house of Eckstein who is appointed Civil Commissioner;
a former prominent official of the Consolidated
Goldfields" — Rhodus-Rudd — who became "Minister of
Mines." It is added that "this list is capable of very considerable
extension." The immediate outcome of this state
of affairs was the issue of two proclamations by Lord
Roberts, which the pamphlet describes as "two of the most
glaring instances of capitalistic legislation ever witnessed."
If the situation were not so tragic it would be ludicrous
!
The flies, having strayed into the web of mr. Rhodes,
hold a meeting to protest against the spider's tricks and
manners !
But we in Holland knew and foresaw all this and we
warned the dupes in time.
And it is for the sake of these financiers, who now
drive the natives, once protected by president Kruger,
into their compounds who develop South Africa into
a large slavestate who want to tax the native in
order to pay for the war *), that England sacrifices a
i) In the annual report of the Consolidated Gold Fields of South
Africa, Limited, which is to be presented to the shareholders on
6 November next we read?
"The directors are happy to report that the leading companies and
Christian nation of free men, and brings a lasting stain
upon the honour of the country!
* *
To the descendants of the men who made England
great I appeal !
Face the question! feel your responsibility.
Be not affraid of disturbing thoughts.
There is only danger and humiliation in facing the
question sideways.
Answer unreservedly whether what your soldiers and
politicians do in the Dutch Republics and Cape Colony
is right?
If you answer this honestly the general reinvigoration
of the national conscience will fellow.
But the awakening cannot wait a moment, for it does
amaze me "almost to helplessness of hand and thought",
as Ruskin used to say, to find so many men and women
in England, who are content in these dark days ot their
country's dishonour to live happily and cheerfully and
without care for the morrow who in their safe and sunbright
houses, surrounded by the smiling upturned faces
of lovely children, can sing with the dearest and tenderest
words of their familiar speech of "home, sweet home!"
while in the most criminal war of this whole century
their soldiers make bloodstained tracks through two small
states of freeborn men, soiling all they touch, causing
widespread multitudinous misery, confiscating land, ruining
firms are working together in complete accord as regards the importation
of native labor to the Transvaal, and its distribution to the
various mines *■ • • * *
"It may be expected that the mine laborer will, owing to these and
other reforms, become a better and therefore — apart from the rate
of wage which will no doubt settle itself as the various ordinary
forces which affect supply and demand come into play — a cheaper
workman. It is to be hoped that, in return for the many advantages
which the native races of British South Africa will now secure, Government
will take care that in some form or other those who have not
hitherto been directly taxed shall now contribute to the expenses of
the war and of the Government of the country, and become an
industrious and useful portion of the population!"
homesteads, burning farms, loosing, wounding, killing
and all this out of abject fear, that a small community
of peaceful farmers and shepherds, without an army, might
destroy their immense Empire !
***
In appealing for the third time in behalf of the struggling
Dutch Republics to the love for righteousness of all
Christian nations, I begin by speaking with the utmost
respect and reverence of some noble and courageous
Englishmen.
The British delegation at the Peace conference in Paris
has shown the inherent strength of character of the English
nation and the great moral force of which their country
still disposes. It was the British group, who proposed
these resolutions, which were passed in full congress after
a debate of two days:
(i) »Tbe responsibility for the war now devastating South
Africa falls upon the one of the two parties which repeatedly
refused arbitration — that is, upon the British Government.
(i) The British Government, in ignoring the principles of
right and justice which have been the glory of the great British
nation — that is to say, in refusing arbitration and in using
menaces only too likely to bring about war in a dispute which
might have been settled by juridical methods v-has committed
an outrage against the rights of nations calculated to retard the
pacific evolutior of humanity. «
This refusal ot arbritation makes the British government
responsible for this war. It is right to impress this
on Englishmen, though I know that it is unnecessary,
as neither Mr. Chamberlain nor the South-African league
any longer shirk their responsibility for it!
Has not Mr. Chamberlain said lately: "If it were really
true that I am responsible for the war, I should say that
it was a feather in my cap !" 4 ) and has the not confessed
i) The Morning Leader of IO October quotes this beautiful expression
of a feather in his cap, from the Election speech of Mr.
Chamberlain at Cannock Chase, when he also has claimed that "the
war was the war of the whole Government." It used to be the war
of Mr. Kruger!
t
in one of those election speeches, which will brand him
for ever:
U I believe in my heart that the war would never have
come if I could have persuaded Kriiger that I was in
earnest."
These sentences yield a clue to the negotiations of last
year ! How this politician managed to have himself misunderstood
we all know, but this u Bekenntniss seiner schonen
Seele" is of interest, because the lie of a long meditated
plan of Boer aggression is knocked on the head by it.
Mr. Chamberlain admits that the initiative came from
Jiim, that he meant to have his way, that he forced the
Republics to war for the small difference between what
he asked and the Boers would give.
* *
When I have to use Mr. Chamberlain's name I feel how
your war demoralises even those, who only read of it.
It is horrible and degrading to hate! But how can we
speak without loathing of the ambitious politician, whose
reckless bullying methods forced on the war?
Your leading minister is a politician, who refuses to
meet the grave charges arising from his neglect of the
precautions rightly felt to be necessary for the prevention
of corruption in the public service ....
who did not hesitate to use as the material of electioneering
calumnies the contents of a private letter stolen
and opened by officials through whose hands it passed ....
who, as the Quarterly Review acknowledges: "treats a
considerable body of Englishmen as being consciously
indifferent to the interest and honour of their country".
Well, this speculator in patriotism, who shouts : "Traitor !"
from the platform, to a couple of million of his own people,
is the man, whose word you had to believe when he
accused the statesmen of the Republics this slanderer
is the minister who conducted the negociations with the
Transvaal !
***
Let us now, to understand the wickedness of Mr. Chamberlain's
war see for a moment what sort of men these
slandered Boers are, the devastation of whose country is
a feather in the English Minister's cap.
Major Spencer-Browne (a Queensland contingent officer)
writes in the Brisbane Courier;
.... I never want to meet kinder, more hospitable and more
comfortable people. True, some of them are poor and ignorant,
but the general run of them live comfortably, rear their families
well and with fair education. They are the reverse of what we
have been taught to consider the**?. It will be a happy day for
Australia when our pastoral country is settled by as fine a class
of people."
Dr. Con an Doyle addressing the other night the members
to the Pail-Mall Club, said:
„The Boers had been the victims of a great deal of cheap
slander in the Press. The men who had seen most of the Boers
m the field were the most generous in estimating their character.
That the white flag was hoisted by the Boers as a cold-blooded
device for luring our men into the open was an absolute calumny.
To discredit their valour was to discredit our victory."
Can honest Englishmen read without the most mournfull
feeling what mr. R. H. Davis writes about them in
Scribner's Magazine?
He proffers this testimony to the general character of
the Boers, which is the more impressive as he had been
predisposed to an entirely oppositie view. He says: —
"I left Pretoria with every reason for regret. I had come to
it a stranger and had found friends among men whom I had
learned to like for themselves and for their cause. I had come
prejudiced against them, believing them to be all the English
press and my English friends had painted them: semi-barbarous,
uncouth, money-loving, and treacherous in warfare. I found
them simple to the limit of their own disadvantage, magnanimous
to their enemies, independent and kindly. I had heard much
of the corruption of their officials; and I saw daily their chief
minister of state, at a time when every foreign resident was
driving through Pretoria in a carriage, passing to and from the
government buildings in a tram-car, their President living in a
white- washed cottage, their generals serving for months at the
front without pay and without hope of medals or titles.
„Their ignorance of the usages and customs of the great world
outside of their own mountains, for which the English held them
in such derision, harmed no one so greatly as it harmed them
selves. Had they known the outside world, had they been able
to overcome their distrust of the foreigner, had they understood
in what way to make use of him, how to manipulate the press
of the world to tell the truth in their behalf as cleverly as the
English had used it to misrepresent them ; had they known how
to make capital of the sympathies of the French, the Americans,
and the Germans, and to turn it to their own account ; had they
known which men to send abroad to tell the facts, to plead and
to explain; had they known which foreign adventurer was the
one to follow implicitly on the battle-field and which to "vootsak"
to the border ; had they been men of the world instead of farmers
in total ignorance of it, they might have brought about intervention,
or an honourable peace. The very unworldlines of the
Boer, at which the Englishman sneers, did much, I believe, to
save Great Britain from greater humiliations, from more frequent
"reverses" and more costly defeats".
It is the country of these people, which is devastated
by the English, because they defend their independence
and their soil to the last!
* *
*
When some English, ashamed of the slanders of their
yellow press, acknowledge the kindheartedness and honourable
character of the Boers, they defend the war
and the annexation by the plea of "the security of the
empire". I wonder that they are not ashamed of their
unheroic plea, of this cowardly excuse for a crime.
For it has now been confessed by Dr. Jameson that
"the long-planned Boerconspiracy" against the British
Empire is a lie.
The Transvaal did notprepare for 15 years to make
war on England!
Dr. Jameson, who is now a member of the Cape Parliament,
told his electors, that when in the beginning of
1896 he began the Raid with 600 men he was not attacking
foolishly a well-armed State.
For the historian of the war his words are invaluable :
"At that time the Transvaal was not like the Transvaal of
to-day. Apart from the rifles in the hands of individual burghers,
the whole armoury of the Transvaal was contained in the
so-called Pretoria Fort, guarded by three Staats artillerymen, and
its sole protection was a broken-down corrugated iron fence.
Only a few days before he crossed the border. Judge Kotze had
.1
told Mr. Newton, with whom, he was travelling that, seeing and
recognising the serious discontent on the Rand then, he was
on his way to warn mr. Kruger that, in his opinion, any night
150 Randites, armed with sticks, could march across to Pretoria,
seize the Fort, and have the Transvaal in their possession. The
Rand revolutionists had more than that number, not armed with
sticks, but thoughly well armed, and thoroughly prepared to
carry out that very project, which was to have come off on the
very day he crossed the border".
The Transvaal only started its armaments when the
invasion of its territory in time of peace had roused it
to a sudden knowledge of its danger.
It was the German Emperor's knowledge that the
Transvaal was not armed, which caused his Majesty in
his noble indignation to send to president Kruger the
historic telegram :
"I express my sincere congratulatioju that, supported by
your people and without appealing far the help of Friendly
Powers, you have succeeded by your own energetic action
against armed bands which invaded your country as disturbers
of the peace and have thus been enabled to restore
peace and safeguard the independence of the country against
attacks from outside".
And when after the Raid arms had been ordered for
the citizens to enable them to defend their country, "the
security of the Empire" was not threatened by them.
For it is now known in the whole world, that these
aggressive Boers" have no army and never had one!
The best book about the war I know is mr. Howard
C. Hillegas's With the Boer forces (Methuen).
Mr. Hillegas acted as war correspondent ol the New
York World with the Boer Army, and had every oppertunity
of following the fighting both in Natal and in the
later battles in the territory of the Republics.
As a result of his observation and inquiries Mr. Hillegas
believes that the Boers never had more than 30.000 men
in the field at one time, and that the average was considerably
under 25,000. The numbers fluctuated from
time to time as the farmers deserted or returned to the
laagers. No such fighting force has ever been seen before,
nor probably will ever be seen again. It consisted actually
of the entire male population of the two Republics. No
/\
condition or position was sufficient excuse to remain behind.
University students, backwoodsmen, millionaires and farmers
fought'shoulder to shoulder. All were on a common
footing. These men had no battle cry of revenge. Even
the name of Jameson appears to have raised no bitter
feeling. His name, says Mr. Hillegas, was frequently
heard, but always in a manner which would have led
one unacquainted with recent Transvaal history to believe
that he was the patron saint of the Republic. The cry
of tf Remember Jameson" was not caused by the memory
of the wrongs which he had committed, but was rather
a plea to honour him for having placed the Republic on
its guard against the dangers which threatened it from
beyond its borders.
* *
The Boer army, according to Mr. Hillegass account,
was one of the most remarkable fighting machines that
has ever existed. How it ever accomplished anything
is a mystery ! There was no discipline, punishments could
not be enforced, and obedience to orders was a purely
voluntary matter. Burghers, it is true, could be compelled
to go to the front but no power on earth could compel
them to fight if they did not choose to do so. It was
a republican army, composed of republicans, and run on
republican principles. All officers were elected by public
vote, but beyond their personal influence they had no
real authority. There were hundreds of men in the Natal
laagers, says Mr. Hillegas, who never engaged in one
battle, and never fired one shot in the first six montns
of the war. On all disputed questions the majority vote
decided. A council of war, or krijgsraad, settled the plan
of campaign and all other military questions. It was composed
of every officer from corporal to commander-in-chief,
and the corporal's vote had the same value as a general's : —
„When there happened to be a deadlock in the balloting at a
krijgsraad, it was more than once the case that the vote of the
commandant-general counted for less than the voice of a burgher.
In one of the minor krijgsraads in Natal there was a tie in the
voting, which was ended when an old burgher called his corporal
aside and influenced him to change his vote."
The decision of the Krijgsraad, however, was not binding.
It could be. and frequently was, disregarded by
individual commanders. In any case the officers could
only call for volunteers to carry out the project resolved
upon. They could not order their men to fight. If the
burghers did not approve they did not volunteer. Mr.
Hillegas mentions one instance. Several days after the
Spion Kop battle, General Botha called for four hundred
volunteers to assist in resisting an attack that it was
feared would be made. There were almost 10.000 men
in the environs of Ladysmith at that time, but it was
with the utmost difficulty that the 400 men could be
gathered. In Natal during the early part of the campaign
the real fighting spirit was absent. It was not
till after the capture of Cronje that the burghers polished
up their rifles and fought with a will.
What was it that kept this mass of undisciplined men
together and made them so formidable?
Mr. Hillegas replies that it was the deeply religious
feeling which pervaded the whole of the commandoes.
That, he believes, was the secret of their success : —
"It was as much his religion as his ability to aim unerringly
that made the Boer a good soldier. If the Boer army had been
composed of an irreligious, undisciplined body of men instead
of the psalming farmers, it would have been conquered by itself.
The religion of the Boers was their discipline.,,
Now I ask all men of honour in England, whether the
dangers with which this handful of peasants, whose
religion is their discipline, threaten the Britisch Empire
of Europe, Asia, Africa, America and Australia, are great
enough to justify a war of extermination and the annexation?
And it is no argument to mention your losses in this
war?
You mourn for the mulitude of slain, forgetting that
the greatest number of your sons were not killed by the
bullets of the Boers but by the incurable negligence of
your own government and by the ineptitude of your
officers. And that is why your cry for revenge on the
Boers . . . that is why your longing for burned homes
and a ruined and depopulated country is a crime as well
as a delusion !
"What ! !" you answer indignant, "we want revenge ?"
Yes, you* want revenge, revenge for your humiliations,
your wounded vanity and pride, your loss of prestige
and honour, revenge for Majuba, revenge for countless
defeats, surrenders and losses of canon a hundred times
more shameful than Majuba, revenge for your military
system broken down., for your army, that has ceased
to exist as an organised whole.
And what a noble revenge you take !
Think of the way you treat your own subjects in Cape
Colony !
Though there was no rebellion in any part of British
territory, save where British forces could not give protection,
and the enemy was left in sole occupation, you
treat the Cape Dutch as criminals. Is it not true what
the Speaker observes :
"Before the war our colonists were assured that our Army was
able to defend their borders ; during the war we broke our word,
leaving Dutch-born fellow-subjects to the tender mercies of the
invader, and in these circumstances the absence of British protection
and the presence of a kindred race fighting for independence
combined to undermine loyalty to the Crown; and yet,
after the war, we are going to infict a punishment for disaffection,
which was regarded as impossibly severe after the Canadian
rebellion and to apply it to unwilling acessories who were
exempted even after the Indian Mutiny."
What is your defence against this indictment, oh
Englishmen, who used to pride yourselves on your u free,
tolerant and unaggressive Empire", but who now condone
the political job to defranchise and punish thousands of
Dutchborn Bitish subjects in Cape Colony, thus giving
the notorious "loyalists" a majority?
How terrible it is to read about the way honourable
and innocent men and women are dragooned there.
The latest information regarding martial law in Cape
Colony makes it evident that it has been used by the
Cape politicians, in whose hands it has been placed, in
order to exasperate and disfranchise as many Dutch as
possible. The policy is thus succinctly described in a
letter from a correspondent, who has travelled the, entire
north-east of the colony within the last few weeks:
"The game was in many cases to drive men over to the
enemy; when they wouldn't go they were arrested, in spite,
whenever a Kaffir could be got to lie about them".
All who know the nature of the Kaffir, and how easily
he is induced by fear or mere complaisance to give the
desired answer, are aware that convictions obtained upon
such evidence are mere abuses of the forms of legal trial.
When it is added that agents are employed to approach
Kaffir servants in order to elicit from them information
which may incriminate their master some notion of the
scandals perpetrated in the name of martial law may
be formed.
When Mr. A. P. du Plessis protested in the Capehouse
of Assembly to the effect that his servants were being
furtively offered rewards to testify against him, the official
reply was: the servants were only promised their
"expenses" if they should go and give testimony at
Steynsburg. Now, Mr. Du Plessis' servants could reach
Steynsburg in only one of three ways — on foot, by horse
or conveyance belonging to him, or by transport supplied
by the spies. There is no railway, and there is no inn
on the way; so that "expenses" in such a case can stand
for nothing but reward. The official defence was a farce . . .
yet Mr. Innes accepted it!
* *
Can the English nation think with pride of lord Salisbury's
:
u We seek no gold-fields and desire no territory", words
spoken at the critical moment, when many Colonial Dutch
thought of going tot heir kinsmen's aid, and refrained from
doing so because they believed the declaration of the
English Prime-Minister but words repudiated as soon
as England's danger passed? Do the English in Canada
and Australia admire the conduct of English officers,
turning helpless women and children, as they did at
Boshoff, out of their homes and then hunting them in
midwinter into a wilderness 2000 feet above sea level,
out of the Kaffir dwellings, where they had sought and
found shelter, and which huts were then destroyed?
Was it really indispensable to the greatness and power
of the British Empire to force a mother with a twentyfour
hour's old baby, to rise and come out and look on
while her home and possessions were destroyed. She
was the niece of a lady in Capetown who told of this
crime.
Are Alva and Weyler the new King Arthurs of the
British race?
In what way is England's treatment of the Dutch in
the highlands of South Africa to be preferred to the way
their forefathers were treated in the lowlands of Europe
by the owners of a former Armada?
** *
In Fronde's History of the English in Ireland I read
about the conquest of Ireland:
"The English nation were shuddering over the atrocities of the
Duke op Alva. The children in the nurseries were being inflamed
to patriotic rage and madness by tales of Spanish tyranny. But
it was no fault of the English soldiers if any Irish child of that
generation was allowed to live to manhood ... So desolate became
Munster that the lowing of a cow or the voice of the ploughman
was not to be heard that year from Dingle to the Rock of Cashel."
History repeats itself! The English nation shuddered
over the atrocities of Weyler and at once imitated him.
There is, as Froude shows, only one country Europe
treated so unjustly and so cruelly before and that
is Ireland!
Is that example so exilarating that you treat again a
whole nation as political helots .... that you let men like
general Brabant, the leader of the Brabanditti, declare
in the Capehouse of Assembly: ft I regard any one with
a Dutch name as suspect?" that you let men like
major Crewe boast:
a that he had put the whole of the election committee
of his succesful rival at the last General Election into
goal, where they remained untried and, for the most part,
unaccused, a on suspicion"!
/
Even after the honorable way in which Mr. Chamberlain
has manipulated your own elections we dare to ask :
do these words and acts redound to your credit? Is it
not odious to act as you do in Cape Colony against women
and children, whose husbands and fathers were compelled
against their will to join in the insurrection, when by
your bad management and the want of knowledge and
comonsense of your generals you left them without defence?
Is it not as stupid as wicked to treat the inhabitants
of Cape-Colony as rebels, while you cannot contradict
what Mr. Merriman pointed out:
"Not many months ago, it is not too much to say, the British
hold on South Africa lay in the hands of the Dutch Colonists,
who, had they risen, might have made the military situation
imposible. At that time their representatives, their ministers of
religion, and leaders of all classes threw their weight on the side
of the British connection."
If the Dutch of Cape colony had joined their kinsmen,
your army, such at it was, would have been forced to
surrender, but now you make use ot your hundred thousand
men to deprive the Dutch of their vote and to govern
them by terrorism!
What is the meaning of your terrible cruelty?
In the Revue des Paris of October Mr. Chevrillon exposes
the complete inability of the English in the Boer
war to conceive any point of view other than the purely
selfish one.
But what puzzles him most is the astonishing pressing
even of Christianity itself into the service of imperial
expansion,
In the Revue des Revues Mme. Novieoff writes:
"The English are constantly talking of humanity, and in practice
they are very often the most inhuman of all nations."
Fourteen months ago I would have passionately contradicted
this accusation.
But now?
***
English mothers, do you realise what is being done in
South- Africa in the name of a woman, of your own noble
Queen Victoria? Do you know the meaning of the proud
news Lord Roberts wired:
«Lord Methuen has denuded the country round Zeerust?*
In these words Lords Roberts boasts of the atrocity of
laying a whole country bare and of making a grey wasteful
desolation of happy harvest fields and homes.
What is worse: killing outright as Alva did, or taking
away the means by which the farmers live and the house
that shelters their children?
When there was a fear that the Boers would destroy
the mines and property of British capitalists in defence
of their country, how loud was the lamentation in the
city, and how bloodcurdling its threats and denunciations!
And now, how does Lord Roberts describe his
Spanish way of winning the loyalty of men and women,
whom he wants to exalt to the proud position of his fellow
subjects? As he says in his second proclamation, he
feels "compelled to adopt measures which are ruinous to
the country, entail endless suffering on the burghers and
their families, and the longer this guerilla warfare continues
the more rigorously they will be enforced."
And what are these measures ? Let England's Liberal
review the Speaker give the answer:
"The principal one is the burning of farmhouse, where the
enemy have found shelter in any of the farm buildings, or where
the railway has been wrecked in the neighbourhood: that is to
say, that if De Wet or any other leader of a commando, makes
a swoop upon the railway, or occupies a farm, our gallant Generals,
who cannot catch De Wet, will take it out of the women and
children who have commited the crime of living in the neighbourhood.
The husband and father may be in the fighting line
or may not: if he be, this method of fighting him is unworthy
of Englishmen; if he be not it is foolish as well as ignoblo."
Engeland's reign of terror.
To make the English people understand the terrible
mistake that was made by Mr. Chamberlain in goading
on the boers to war by his bullying style of diplomacy,
and by lord Roberts adopting the strategy ot Tilly and
Weyler, I want to show the desolation and misery
they caused, the appalling nature of which is not yet
realised in England.
In giving some examples of the cruel way the English
troops are desolating the whole country, and of the reign
of terror which have established, I only quote Englishmen.
Everything is near, authentic, despicable. Afterwards
in a book will be published the testimony under
oath of Boers and Hollanders, Germans and French. For
the moment I want to prevent the cheap answer that
my witnesses are enemies of the English.
As some people might think that the cruelties of the
English in South Africa began only recently, when the
guerilla war roused them to despair, I summon as my
first witness captain Ritchie, who issued on July 9th at
Krugersdorp this proclamation.
By order
T. II
PUBLIC NOTICE.
ris hereby notified for information that unless the men
at present on commando belonging to families in the
Town and District of Krugersdorp surrender themselves
and hand in their arms to the Imperal Authorities by
20 JULY, the whole of their property will be confiscated
and their families turned out destitute and homeless.
By Order,
C. H. M, RITCHIE,
Capt. K. Horse,
Dist. Supt. Police. 3 )
Krugersdorp, 9 July, 1900.
3) This is copied from the official proclamation.
When it was condemned by some influential men at the Cape, it
was altered a week afterwards as follows:
V.R.
Public Notice.
Notice is hereby given that unless those persons of the town and
district of Krugersdorp, who are now on commando, surrender them-
This is a good example of British military rule! How
noble to tell brave and honourable enemies that, unless
they desert their countrymen's ranks (for the Transvaal
was not even annexed yet), their families will be turned
out destitute and homeless! jr»
When even some Tories cried :•** Shame!" the proclamation
was changed, but it had already shown what
military rule means, and with what cruelty it can threaten
under the initials of the kindhearted old Victoria
Regina.
The special correspondent of the Express, from Bloemfontein,
writes an article on "Loot a shameless crime".
He describes a house near Paardeberg:
"A few regiments of irregular horse swooped down and did
the work; broken furniture, croockery, pictures, bric-a-brac of all
kinds, clothing broken glass — everything destroyed — a pitiable
scene of desolation. In a corner, with its legs twisted out of
shape, lay a little tin horse, a child's toy — the paint cracked and
the head bent back to the tall. Even this trifle had been deserving
of the attention of some stalwart trooper. I picked up a tattered
Bible, mechanically tearing out a tew more leaves."
The special correspondent of the Manchester Guardian
said in riding from Bloemfontein to Kimberley:
selves and their arms and ammunition and take the oath of neutrality,
and further declare stock and supplies in their possession,
before 20 July 1900, the whole of their stock and supplies is liable
to be confiscated,
The previous notice in this matter is cancelled.
By Order,
G. H. M. Ritchie,
Capt. K. Horse,
Dist. Supt. Police.
Krugersdorp, 16 July, 1900.
But it came to the same in the end!
"Scrutator" wrote a fortnight afterwards to The Morning Leader :
"Both proclamations are alike "By Order"; and when one learns
that a multitude of women and children were actually deported after
all, it may be inferred that the cancellation of the first notice is
simply an act of prudence. It represents a policy deliberately resolved
on by the authorities ; und we can but ask ourselves to what methode
we are coming in the Transvaal!"
"The way is a line of desolation, the farmhouses have not
merely been sacked, they have been savagely destroyed. The
mirrors have been smashed, the pianos wrecked, children's toys
and books wantonly destroyed. Even the buildings themselves
have been burned and seriously damaged. '
Earl de la Warr, correspondent for the Globe, writes
after the Modder River fight:
"It is certainly worthy of remark that the Boers, who are not
supposed to have any discipline at all, have in this part of the
country (Cape Colony and Free State) apparently behaved with,
exemplary consideration for the rights of private property."
A Munster Fusilier, writing to his mother from Honey
Nest, says: —
"We have a nice job on hand, going out to the farms for
firewood — it doesn 't matter what it is. The other day we
brought in two pianos, a sofa and two dozen chairs what you
would get ■£ 1 50 for at home — and Billy Jones made short work
of them to boil our dinner with. All the people have left their
homes, and we can do what we like with them."
Another private writing from Modder River Honey
Kestkloof, says:—
"We have to go out every morning on what they call looting,
robbing the farmers' houses of all we can get in the line of
firewood, breaking up chairs, tables, and even pianos. The farmer's
houses are splendidly furnished."
Mr. John Stuart, of the Morning Post, writes of the
Boer farms: —
"Wat a scene of loot! We found several rifles. The natives
of the neighbourhood looted all the furniture and then someone
without orders set fire to the house. I own to having felt a
warm glow at the heart when I saw the smoke of that bonfire
ascending to heaven. A beast of a rebel was getting his deserts.
Another farm was being looted. Again I had the joy of seeing
the smoke of a rebel's house ascending".
This district had sent in months ago a petition to Sir
A. Milner appealing against the brutality of the English
troops.
Mr. Thomas F. Millard, special correspondent with the
Boer army, sends an account to the Daily Mail of the
flight to the Vaal River:
-.4*.
"Huge waggons, drawn by full spans of trek oxen, piled high
with farmhouse furniture, where perched wistful-eyed women and
children, with frightened tear-stained faces; past deserted houses,
with wildeopen doors and scattered belongings; past ambulances
filled with groaning wounded. It was bitterly cold. The wind
had a frost edge and cut to the quick. Thinly-clad women
clasped their shivering babes. Heartrending as was this enforced
and huried abandonment of homes, few hesitated to make the
sacrifice. Anything was better than to fall into the hands of
the hated English!"
Private Fred Bonsor of the Imperial Yeomanry writes :
"Of course, all farms and houses on our way are looted,
burned down and destroyed. It looks an awful shame, and the
scenes are simply sickening at times, when some poor women
try hard to save something for themselves and their children;
but we cannot pass over the fact that their husbands, fathers and
sons are all away fighting against us day after day. It really
looks terrible when, glancing back on the way, you see smoke
and flames all along the sky-line, and shadows of women and
kids running about trying to save something."
*£
The u of course", with which private Bonsor begins, is
a noble tribute to England's way of subdoing a free
people !
In the article which Mr. Conan Doyle wrote for the
Strand Magazine of September I came across a sketch of
the looting of a Free State farm from which shots had
been fired on the troops:
"The general rides up, but he has no consolation for the
women. The farm has brought it upon itself. He rides on.
A parson rides up. "I can't imagine why they don't burn
it," says he."
The Levite of the English church not only passes the
wounded man but wishes to finish him!
How the war has warped good sense and good feeling !
How terrible the ever gathering popularity of ignorant
brute force and the nearly total absence of a watchful
and temperate opinion at home!
xm
Many on the British side put no disguise on their satisfaction
over vindictive measures. I have before me the
„Cape Argus of 21 June, in which there is cited this
statement from the South African News:
71
,;-#X
>xw
3§£sx
■- &5-
:%
%.
M
®|8#
&'*
"Between Bloemfontein and Boshof, between 30 and 40 homesteads
have been burnt down— utterly destroyed. That is only
one route. Many others have beent burnt down also. Their homes
destroyed, women and children have been turned out on to the
field in the bitter South African winter."
To this allegation not a word of denial is offered by
the a Argus," Without a hint of repudiation, it proceeds :
"When our troops have been fired at from farmhouses flying
the white flag, when arms have been found concealed, and when
Boers who have taken the oath of neutrality have violated that
oath, it is only to be expected that sharp and summary punishment
would be inflicted as a warning to others."
Here we have the implicit claim that the misdeeds of Boers
are fitly to be punished at the hands of a British force
by turning out their women and children to freeze to
death in the winter fields. When this is openly argued,
it can be felt how many acts of extreme vindictiveness
have been committed.
* * *
"Scrutator" writes from Cape town to the Morning
Leader:
"After getting hundreds to surrender on a proclamation,
Lord Roberts holds himself at liberty to cancel his
promises because certain individuals have broken faith.
In strict fact his agreement was with individuals as such,
and he has no more right to throw over two on the score
of the bad faith of one than the civil power has right to
punish one man for another's crime. It is merely martial
law in excelsis — the will of the general overriding every
principle of equity. A concrete case, reported in a loyalist
telegram, will serve to show how things are going in
the Transvaal".
Johannesburg, 17 Aug. — On Tuesday evening Pte. Richards,
of the Railway Pioneers, was mysteriously shot near Witpoortje,
four miles from Krugersdorp. He was doing patrol duty, and
when picked up yesterday he had five bullet wounds including
one through the head. As he was sniped by some resident in
the vicinity, the people were called upon to produce the murderer.
As they did not, some four houses were demolished, and the
occupants sent to Johannesburg.
The crime, be it observed, was u mysterious" ; that is
to say, nobody knows who did it. But for purposes of
martial law it is assumed that "some resident in the vicinity"
is guilty and as nobody can pretend to identify
that resident, four houses are at once demolished, and
four families sent to Johannesburg. Thus are Boers taught
to realise and revere the majesty of British justice. You
first penalise some 50 people at random, and afterwards
you may perhaps put them on trial.
Had Lord Roberts resolutely adhered to his first policy
of clemency, and disdained to break his public promise
of protection and immunity to all who surrendered, he
would have made himself respected.
But he has given a free hand to the farmburners ♦ . .
penalised helpless and disarmed people for damage done
to the railway in their district by flying bands ... he
has even resorted to the evil expedient of placing innocent
neutrals on his trains to receive the fire of their
armed countrymen. The result is that the credit of
British fairness is gone for ever in South- Africa. War was
made against women and children. The Burghers were
evicted from Pretoria. Listen to the beautiful way in
which Reuter's correspondent at Pretoria describes this
Christian act of war:
"It has of late been apparent to the British military authorities
here that among a great number of poor in the town, who were
being fed practically tree of charge, were the wives of many
burghers now actually in the field against us. Even to British
magnanimity there must be some limit (!) and to-day a proclamation
has been issued ordering the wives of all Boers now fighting
to report themselves to the authorities tomorrow in order
that they may be sent into the enemy's lines."
These mothers and children were deprived of their
own houses and beds . . . were driven from a place of
safety into the field of active warfare. Nobody could
pretend that these women are the wives of rebels and
traitors.
What a way to convert the Dutch into submissive
subjects !
Lord Roberts certainly took up Longfellow's Evangeline
after his courageous sortie against women. It must have
comforted him that the English were already just as
brutal under George I.
How charmed he will have been when be read of that
awful eviction of Acadians, or Nova Scotians, as described
in "Evangeline" . . . when he read the prefatoiy note to
the poem and the description of how the Acadians were
scattered in different colonies, relations and friends being
purposely separated! This was in 1714.
Now it is the jubilee year 1900!
Lord Roberts, continuing his policy of ferocity, and as
if he had not done harm enough already by breaking
his pledge of protection and immunity to individual
burghers of the Free State, who have surrendered, formally
rescinded all previous proclamations in the Transvaal,
and announces that:
"all the burghers in the districts occupied by the British forces^
except those who have taken the oath will be regarded as prisoners
of war, and will be transported^
And his soldiers understand what he wants.
Here is an extract from a letter written by an English
soldier:
"We have got a force of irregulars working round the district,
all mounted infantry, and their orders seem to be, as far as I
can make out, "Shoot, loot, and burn. They returned after
three days' excursion yesterday, having had one man killed and
about twelve farms burnt. I reckon this game will do more to
bring the Boers to their senses than anything else!"
The St. James's Gazette printed a letter from its correspondent
at Ficksburg in the Orange Free State. He is
a violent Anti-Boer. But his criticisms are none the less
damaging to the English!
He is a partisan of rigor. Like the Standard he regards
De Wet and his followers as "brigands", who ought to
be "shot or hanged".
But he complains that the English authorities are inconsistent.
Proclamations are for ever being issued, now
lenient, now severe, but each invariably contradicting its
predecessor. To-day we dismiss a man to his farm on
parole, to morrow we burn his hay and take him prisoner.
The result is that whereas :
"Six months ago at least a third of the Free Staters were in
our favor, now it is doubtful if we possess a single friend."
The writer attributes this result to "inconsistency".
But here is his description of a march with General Campbell's
column:
"The General told me thad he had received orders to "sweep"
the country All farms on the line of march were cleared
of horses cattle, sheep, waggons, carts, &o., the forage being
burnt, and the owners bidden to join the ranks of the prisoners,
of whom there were already a goodly number. In several cases
I ventured humbly to point out that many of these men, in fact
most of them, had been paroled and allowed to return to their
farms, and had received a protection certificate for their property
from the District Commissioner. Some of them were Britishers,
&c My pleas were of no avail."
This is the Pax Britannica!
The following is an extract from a letter from a soldier
dated Kroonstad, September 23 which I read in Reynold's
Newspaper of 28 October: "I have been on a thirty-four
days' patrol, fired only eight shots all the time, was sent
with 100 men burning farms and looting all stock, burnt
twenty-eight farms. I wish I could have brought some
of the stuff home we burnt in that trip."
This is the description given by the special correspondent
of the Manchester Guardian, with Colonel Mahon.
■#
"In ten miles we have burned no fewer than six farmhouses ;
the wife watched from her sick husband's bedside the burning
of her home a hundred yards away. It seems as though a kind
of domestic murder were being committed. I stood till late last
night and saw the flames lick round each piece of the poor
furniture — the chairs and tables, the baby's era die, the chest of
drawers, containing a world of treasure, and when I saw the
poor housewife's face pressed against the window of the neighbouring
hause, my own heart burned with a sense of outrage.
The effect on the Colonial troops who are gratifying their feelings
of hatred and revenge, is very bad. They swarm into the
houses, looting and destroying, and filling the air with high
sounding cries of vengeance. Why burn the houses — the ends
achievd are so small, punishment, could be otherwise inflicted?
If I described one-half of the little things wich I saw in the
process of destruction, I should be accused of sentimentalising,"
1
X-+
*,
X3f;
X|?
•s«
M
m
$£
-- j&&
;,J|
m
.:■" * . x^?f
,i * v ' v *' • " %/ " "t-rs- ■s'S"-,^ *•"- - V* *"--." * '~\-~ $>'&'?&*'*' ~z -~ -^•*f- p* ,*rl
Mr. Battersby, in the Morning Post, June 30, writes.
"The dismantling of deserted houses is a speedy affair. The
doors are smashed from their hinges, lintel and side-posts wrenched
from the brickwork, the flooring is torn up, sometimes even
the roof tree is dragged out, chairs, tables, and chests of drawers
may be seen going into camp on the backs of the spoilers. The
whole place is gutted with a passion for destruction."
The special correspondent of the Morning Leader Mr.
E. W. Smith, writes:
"General French and General Pole-Carew, at the head of the
Guarde and eighteenth brigade, are marching in, burning practycaUy
everything on the road.
"I hear to-day that General Rundle burnt his way up to
Dewetsdorp. At one farm only women were left. Still riffles
were found under the mattress. Orders were inexorable. The
woman threw her arms round te officers neck and begged that
the homestead might be spared. When the flames burst from
the doomed place the poor woman herself on her knees, tore
open her bodice, and bared her breasts, screaming: "Shoot
me — shoot me! I've nothing, more to live for now that my husband
is gone, and our farm is burnt and our cattle taken!"
Private Stanley, of the X. S. W. contingent, writes to
the Sydney Telegraph:
"When within 800 yards of the farm we halted and the
infantry blazed a volley into the house ; we broke open the place
and went in. It was beautifully furnished and the officers got
several things they could make use of. There was a lovely
library — books of all descriptions, printed in Dutch and English.
I secured a bible, also a rifle, quite new. After getting all we
wanted out of the house, our men put a sharge under and blew
it up. It seemed such a pity, it was a lovely house."
A letter of a Trooper Morris, published September
6, 1900:
"Since we are with Clements we have had plenty of work,
burning farms, destroying crops, and commandeering cattle. It
is very hard sometimes, but is must be done. Last Sunday six
of us, including myself, went out with an Imperial officer to a
fine farmhouse, giving the occupants five minutes to clear out all
their goods as well as themselves. There were an old grandmother,
three married daugthers, and several children, crying and
asking for mercy ; but no. And when the time was up we burnt
it to the ground".
The South African News of September 5 th published a
Proclamation issued at Bloemfontein, numbered 602, which
runs as follows: —
"Notice.
"Whereas, by Proclamation, dated the i6th day of June, 1 900.
of Lord Roberts, Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief Her Majesty's
Forces in South Africa, it was notified to, and the inhabitants
and principal residents of the Orange River Colony and the South
African Republic were warned, that whatever wanton damage to
public property, such as Railways, Bridges, Culverts, Telegraph
Wires, &c, took place the houses of persons living in the neighbourhood
would be burned, inasmuch as such destruction could
not take place without their knowledge and connivance, now,
therefore, it is hereby notified for general information that the
following sentences have been passed in connection with destruction
of Property, Railways, &c, in the Orange River Colony,
and have been approved by Field-Marshal Lord Roberts."
There follows a list of some forty persons whose farms
have been burnt in accordance with Lord Roberts' Proclamation.
It is difficult to see how these men can be
made responsible for the attacks on the railway. The
mobile Boer forces cover huge distances, descend on the
railway at one point, and in a few days are able to
attack the railway in some other direction. The Boers
whose farms are burnt have not the slightest responsibility
for the destruction of the railway.
All what I here tell is a reprint of what I wrote in
the Amsterdam Handelsb 7 ad.
But since has appeared the Memorial addressed to
Lord Salisbury by the South African Concilation Committee:
of which Mr. Leonard Courtney is President.
In this Memorial I read that on September 2nd Lord
Roberts addressed a letter to General Botha informing
him that he had actually given orders for the burning
of all farmhouses near the spot where any attempt had
been made to injure trains or railways, and that for ten
miles round every farm should be denuded of all provisions,
cattle, &c. He further informed him that, in consequence
of guerilla fighting, and for the prevention of
xv;yx:x * / --:..x>- » •„ M^^.^^-uV^.-k
