
I 
A 
# x> 
■< 
*■' ,X *-* *"--#W ?* X^. T 
f - >/ £*--?- -~ ' .. X- -" ~ 
r 
* 
XX > --XXX"'-' 
->*. 
0 
f 
& 
-3? 
:V" 
* 
!4. : 
%■ 
V 
O 
~: - %, 
* 
.V^-O x v^ f^ -^ 
:^- 
v 
W£ 
v 
r% 
y<# 
r 
V 
/ 
** - s 
a; 
-4" 
"* 
."* < 
V 
.* 
/ 
J< 
* 
v: 
; va ' v " v 
% 
/ 
X" 
•■&-. 
m- 
•$ 
I 
* 
<!£ 
-m 
:*cft 
* ./kv 
M f % 
*.X-:' "^ 
I 
{ 
'& 
i 
.*• 
M 
-% 
% 
:t 
*r 
¥m 
-* 1 
« 
i 
*. 
" V2s3K 
H 
V 
4 
:* 
; r '-_■ ~ . ~ - " * X *; rx . 
a 
\V* 
\X^\ r^ t -•**- 
? 
■it 
N.B. Copies can be had on application at the Office of the Stop-the-War-Committee, 
Cfockhouse, Arundel street Strand. London. W£. 
The Struggle of the 
Dutch Republics. . 
A GREAT CRIME. 
(An appeal to the conscience of the British Nation.) 
by 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN, 
Editor of „HET ALGEMEEN HANDELSBLAD." 
„HANDELSBLAD" OFFICE. ' 
AMSTERDAM. 
i 
wsm 
§$—- -' "■"■"•■ " " "■'*■" '"■-"■'■ T * ""■ "■'■'■""-' ■' -•■-•"•-""-'•" -*-"v\ '1 
sup-.. 
llis is a reprint of the article published in the % 
of 11 November 1900. J 
itex 
x ;i y ( ;,n 
% : s\r-:\ 
> 
-^ff*~ In January of this year was published: >:^ 
P Open letter to the Duke of Devonshire J 
Lv; 
FROM 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN x 
&HTOR of „Hbt Algemeen Handelsblad". 
~§f-t z - iiT.^ 
and in June 
fThe Struggle of the Dutch Republics. ; 
A (Open letter to an American Lady) 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN ''^tfjB 
HflBpi*?*f~~ Editor of ,,Het Algemeen Handelsblad". . 
are reprints of articles published in English it i; 
~ f §SLV- the ?f Handelsblad". . Jl 
" ~v*-. 
*' s :"^ 
They can be ordered through any Bookseller^ or obtained from a| 
fte Publisher, Algemeen Handelsblad Office, N\ Z. Voorburgwal, 
Amsterdam. 
**- -^*&i£~0s -ax-P^^x* \ ' »> - -: -5 
%* r *&rjfc$£ 1 " lr ' - 
» s . 
*<X,. t ~**- V f\ i 
> 
■^t 
- Vv xt~ 
7k, ftfL-^fccW <^w ' 
The struggle of the Dutch Republics. 
in 
A GREAT CRIME. 
."X 
(An appeal to the conscience of tlie British Nation.) 
"v* 
And Pharaoh said: „ Who is the Lord 
thath I should obey His voice? 
„I know not the Lord, neither will I 
let Israel go". 
How difficult it is to show sufficient selfcontrol, when 
standing with bound hands, incapable to interfere, 
near a cruelly murdered nation, while witnessing the 
ghastliest forms of injustice and untruth! 
But there is always danger that in the extravagant 
words of outraged feeling strength may evaporate. So 
self control is imperative, as strength is wanted for the 
future. To a great poet or orator I leave the task to 
express with the fervour of a Milton or Wordsworth the 
horror and the wrath, kindled in the hearts of all men, 
who love righteousness and believe in God and liberty, 
by this utterly vile war in South-Africa and by the temporary 
success of the Rhodesians and of the press and 
the Statesmen, who bear their yoke. 
Whilst leaving to poets the use of their noble gift to 
this noble end, I make an appeal to the conscience of 
the English people, while it is still time to save a nation 
of freemen from annihilation. But you must testify at 
once if you would testify at all, for opportunities pass 
away^rom you. 
/ 
% 
x*xx 
x~- 
-r^v- -VAC;^ A^H : xWf* A^A •." **, - ; ,*-•*• A ; -: 
4SS#^fe&^^v^,P^' 
Bat I will speak openly and without reserve, for a 
journalist may press his own convictions with bis whole 
might and all possible force of argument, while statesmen, 
whose action involves the whole country, have to be silent. 
And I will not speak as one without hope in the future. 
For I am not thoroughly broken yet by disappointment 
I absolutely refuse to believe that the austere 
and ardent spiritualism of the Puritan is dead in England 
.... I still believe in the thousands of Englishmen 
and women, who want liberty to be cherished and preserved 
.... I believe in the love for high principle of 
the massive remains of the people of Bright and Gladstone, 
in their breadth of view and their liberal judgment, in 
their fairness and in their awe for moral law — God's 
revelation! 
I know how little chance I have to be heard by the 
majority! ■ 
The British Jingo would rather burst in ignorance than 
allow himself to be approached by a foreigner, who 
acknowledges with a smile and a tear, that he is a 
„pro-Boer tf that he is one in soul and heart with the 
men and women of French-Dutch descent, who are killed 
or enslaved on the field they conquered in a stern struggle 
with impossibility. 
I know that it is inpracticable as yet to appeal to those 
who „see red a , intoxicated as they are by the war spirit. . . 
that it is useless to address myself to those who are 
effeminate by their neutrality and indifference, but I 
know also that the old Britsh national character still 
lives in a minority, that looks with horror and disdain 
at the sordid pride and selfishness of the ungenerous 
plutocracy of international capitalists that fomented 
this war. 
* * 
For that the war has been caused by financial intrigue 
is now known the whole world over! 
It has now been proven to the hilt that the grievances 
of the Outlanders were wildly exaggerated that the 
agitation, particularly so far as the press was concerned, 
was largely the work of the financiers, who had previously 
organised the Johannesburg conspiracy, and who, 
as their chief has subsequently confessed, regarded the 
British flag as „the greatest of commercial assets' 7 ! 
Mr. Hobson, who for the Manchester Guardian carefully 
investigated the political position on the Rand, and whose 
verdict can be read in his crystal-clear book "The War 
in South Africa", predicted that the annexation of the 
Transvaal, far from benefiting the white workman or the 
Kaffir, would place in power this same ring of financiers, 
whose primary object would be, first, to destroy competition 
and establish a monopoly of the gold industry, and 
then to beat down wages by the wholesale importation 
of native labour. 
Mr. Hobson summed up the whole case in these words: 
— " We are fighting in order to place a small international 
oligarchy of mineowners and speculators in power at 
Pretoria" 
And now eighteen months after the agitation began, 
it has been proved how right he was! 
We have received from Capetown the "Protest of the 
Refugee Committee, Cape Town, against Capitalist Legislation". 

In this pamphlet the Outlanders petition to be saved 
from their deliverers. Their grievances before the war 
seem slight by comparison with the grievances which 
the settlement threatens. 
They declare that the administration of the Transvaal 
is being worked by and in the interest of the financiers. 
They italicise Mr. Hobson's statement that the Eckstein 
group has already formed the nucleus of "a monopoly 
which may become to the Rand what De Beers has been 
for some years to Kimberley". They similarly emphasise 
Mr. Hobson's statement that "the industrial and agricultural 
future of the Transvaal is already hypothecated to 
this small ring of financial foreigners", and his prophecy 
that "when the British arms have established firm order 
this foreign host will return with enhanced numbers and 
increased power", and that they will "add to their other 
businesses the business of politics". 
The enormous political power exercised by these men 
arises, the committee says, from the facts that they are 
the largest employers of labour, command unlimited 
wealth, and "control the leading organs of the press". 
The authors ot this Protest of the Refugee Committee 
are all men of substance at the Rand, and the Committee 
was appointed at a general meeting of the Outlander 
refugees lately held in Capetown. 
Pretoria had barely fallen, it is pointed out by them, 
before Lord Roberts and the military Governor ol the 
Rand were surrounded by an atmosphere of "interests," 
and the most responsible civil positions in the country 
were filled by former representatives of the interested 
financial corporations. These men, by virtue of their new 
offices, became armed with extensive powers for prying 
into the private financial affairs of the absent community. 
The cases are instanced ot "the individual in charge of 
the money-lending departement of Barnato's Consolidated 
Company who was installed as Financial Adviser ; a director 
of the house of Eckstein who is appointed Civil Commissioner; 
a former prominent official of the Consolidated 
Goldfields" — Rhodus-Rudd — who became "Minister of 
Mines." It is added that "this list is capable of very considerable 
extension." The immediate outcome of this state 
of affairs was the issue of two proclamations by Lord 
Roberts, which the pamphlet describes as "two of the most 
glaring instances of capitalistic legislation ever witnessed." 
If the situation were not so tragic it would be ludicrous 
! 
The flies, having strayed into the web of mr. Rhodes, 
hold a meeting to protest against the spider's tricks and 
manners ! 
But we in Holland knew and foresaw all this and we 
warned the dupes in time. 
And it is for the sake of these financiers, who now 
drive the natives, once protected by president Kruger, 
into their compounds who develop South Africa into 
a large slavestate who want to tax the native in 
order to pay for the war *), that England sacrifices a 
i) In the annual report of the Consolidated Gold Fields of South 
Africa, Limited, which is to be presented to the shareholders on 
6 November next we read? 
"The directors are happy to report that the leading companies and 
Christian nation of free men, and brings a lasting stain 
upon the honour of the country! 
* * 
To the descendants of the men who made England 
great I appeal ! 
Face the question! feel your responsibility. 
Be not affraid of disturbing thoughts. 
There is only danger and humiliation in facing the 
question sideways. 
Answer unreservedly whether what your soldiers and 
politicians do in the Dutch Republics and Cape Colony 
is right? 
If you answer this honestly the general reinvigoration 
of the national conscience will fellow. 
But the awakening cannot wait a moment, for it does 
amaze me "almost to helplessness of hand and thought", 
as Ruskin used to say, to find so many men and women 
in England, who are content in these dark days ot their 
country's dishonour to live happily and cheerfully and 
without care for the morrow who in their safe and sunbright 
houses, surrounded by the smiling upturned faces 
of lovely children, can sing with the dearest and tenderest 
words of their familiar speech of "home, sweet home!" 
while in the most criminal war of this whole century 
their soldiers make bloodstained tracks through two small 
states of freeborn men, soiling all they touch, causing 
widespread multitudinous misery, confiscating land, ruining 
firms are working together in complete accord as regards the importation 
of native labor to the Transvaal, and its distribution to the 
various mines *■ • • * * 
"It may be expected that the mine laborer will, owing to these and 
other reforms, become a better and therefore — apart from the rate 
of wage which will no doubt settle itself as the various ordinary 
forces which affect supply and demand come into play — a cheaper 
workman. It is to be hoped that, in return for the many advantages 
which the native races of British South Africa will now secure, Government 
will take care that in some form or other those who have not 
hitherto been directly taxed shall now contribute to the expenses of 
the war and of the Government of the country, and become an 
industrious and useful portion of the population!" 
homesteads, burning farms, loosing, wounding, killing 
and all this out of abject fear, that a small community 
of peaceful farmers and shepherds, without an army, might 
destroy their immense Empire ! 
*** 
In appealing for the third time in behalf of the struggling 
Dutch Republics to the love for righteousness of all 
Christian nations, I begin by speaking with the utmost 
respect and reverence of some noble and courageous 
Englishmen. 
The British delegation at the Peace conference in Paris 
has shown the inherent strength of character of the English 
nation and the great moral force of which their country 
still disposes. It was the British group, who proposed 
these resolutions, which were passed in full congress after 
a debate of two days: 
(i) »Tbe responsibility for the war now devastating South 
Africa falls upon the one of the two parties which repeatedly 
refused arbitration — that is, upon the British Government. 
(i) The British Government, in ignoring the principles of 
right and justice which have been the glory of the great British 
nation — that is to say, in refusing arbitration and in using 
menaces only too likely to bring about war in a dispute which 
might have been settled by juridical methods v-has committed 
an outrage against the rights of nations calculated to retard the 
pacific evolutior of humanity. « 
This refusal ot arbritation makes the British government 
responsible for this war. It is right to impress this 
on Englishmen, though I know that it is unnecessary, 
as neither Mr. Chamberlain nor the South-African league 
any longer shirk their responsibility for it! 
Has not Mr. Chamberlain said lately: "If it were really 
true that I am responsible for the war, I should say that 
it was a feather in my cap !" 4 ) and has the not confessed 
i) The Morning Leader of IO October quotes this beautiful expression 
of a feather in his cap, from the Election speech of Mr. 
Chamberlain at Cannock Chase, when he also has claimed that "the 
war was the war of the whole Government." It used to be the war 
of Mr. Kruger! 
t 
in one of those election speeches, which will brand him 
for ever: 
U I believe in my heart that the war would never have 
come if I could have persuaded Kriiger that I was in 
earnest." 
These sentences yield a clue to the negotiations of last 
year ! How this politician managed to have himself misunderstood 
we all know, but this u Bekenntniss seiner schonen 
Seele" is of interest, because the lie of a long meditated 
plan of Boer aggression is knocked on the head by it. 
Mr. Chamberlain admits that the initiative came from 
Jiim, that he meant to have his way, that he forced the 
Republics to war for the small difference between what 
he asked and the Boers would give. 
* * 
When I have to use Mr. Chamberlain's name I feel how 
your war demoralises even those, who only read of it. 
It is horrible and degrading to hate! But how can we 
speak without loathing of the ambitious politician, whose 
reckless bullying methods forced on the war? 
Your leading minister is a politician, who refuses to 
meet the grave charges arising from his neglect of the 
precautions rightly felt to be necessary for the prevention 
of corruption in the public service .... 
who did not hesitate to use as the material of electioneering 
calumnies the contents of a private letter stolen 
and opened by officials through whose hands it passed .... 
who, as the Quarterly Review acknowledges: "treats a 
considerable body of Englishmen as being consciously 
indifferent to the interest and honour of their country". 
Well, this speculator in patriotism, who shouts : "Traitor !" 
from the platform, to a couple of million of his own people, 
is the man, whose word you had to believe when he 
accused the statesmen of the Republics this slanderer 
is the minister who conducted the negociations with the 
Transvaal ! 
*** 
Let us now, to understand the wickedness of Mr. Chamberlain's 
war see for a moment what sort of men these 
slandered Boers are, the devastation of whose country is 
a feather in the English Minister's cap. 
Major Spencer-Browne (a Queensland contingent officer) 
writes in the Brisbane Courier; 
.... I never want to meet kinder, more hospitable and more 
comfortable people. True, some of them are poor and ignorant, 
but the general run of them live comfortably, rear their families 
well and with fair education. They are the reverse of what we 
have been taught to consider the**?. It will be a happy day for 
Australia when our pastoral country is settled by as fine a class 
of people." 
Dr. Con an Doyle addressing the other night the members 
to the Pail-Mall Club, said: 
„The Boers had been the victims of a great deal of cheap 
slander in the Press. The men who had seen most of the Boers 
m the field were the most generous in estimating their character. 
That the white flag was hoisted by the Boers as a cold-blooded 
device for luring our men into the open was an absolute calumny. 
To discredit their valour was to discredit our victory." 
Can honest Englishmen read without the most mournfull 
feeling what mr. R. H. Davis writes about them in 
Scribner's Magazine? 
He proffers this testimony to the general character of 
the Boers, which is the more impressive as he had been 
predisposed to an entirely oppositie view. He says: — 
"I left Pretoria with every reason for regret. I had come to 
it a stranger and had found friends among men whom I had 
learned to like for themselves and for their cause. I had come 
prejudiced against them, believing them to be all the English 
press and my English friends had painted them: semi-barbarous, 
uncouth, money-loving, and treacherous in warfare. I found 
them simple to the limit of their own disadvantage, magnanimous 
to their enemies, independent and kindly. I had heard much 
of the corruption of their officials; and I saw daily their chief 
minister of state, at a time when every foreign resident was 
driving through Pretoria in a carriage, passing to and from the 
government buildings in a tram-car, their President living in a 
white- washed cottage, their generals serving for months at the 
front without pay and without hope of medals or titles. 
„Their ignorance of the usages and customs of the great world 
outside of their own mountains, for which the English held them 
in such derision, harmed no one so greatly as it harmed them 
selves. Had they known the outside world, had they been able 
to overcome their distrust of the foreigner, had they understood 
in what way to make use of him, how to manipulate the press 
of the world to tell the truth in their behalf as cleverly as the 
English had used it to misrepresent them ; had they known how 
to make capital of the sympathies of the French, the Americans, 
and the Germans, and to turn it to their own account ; had they 
known which men to send abroad to tell the facts, to plead and 
to explain; had they known which foreign adventurer was the 
one to follow implicitly on the battle-field and which to "vootsak" 
to the border ; had they been men of the world instead of farmers 
in total ignorance of it, they might have brought about intervention, 
or an honourable peace. The very unworldlines of the 
Boer, at which the Englishman sneers, did much, I believe, to 
save Great Britain from greater humiliations, from more frequent 
"reverses" and more costly defeats". 
It is the country of these people, which is devastated 
by the English, because they defend their independence 
and their soil to the last! 
* * 
* 
When some English, ashamed of the slanders of their 
yellow press, acknowledge the kindheartedness and honourable 
character of the Boers, they defend the war 
and the annexation by the plea of "the security of the 
empire". I wonder that they are not ashamed of their 
unheroic plea, of this cowardly excuse for a crime. 
For it has now been confessed by Dr. Jameson that 
"the long-planned Boerconspiracy" against the British 
Empire is a lie. 
The Transvaal did notprepare for 15 years to make 
war on England! 
Dr. Jameson, who is now a member of the Cape Parliament, 
told his electors, that when in the beginning of 
1896 he began the Raid with 600 men he was not attacking 
foolishly a well-armed State. 
For the historian of the war his words are invaluable : 
"At that time the Transvaal was not like the Transvaal of 
to-day. Apart from the rifles in the hands of individual burghers, 
the whole armoury of the Transvaal was contained in the 
so-called Pretoria Fort, guarded by three Staats artillerymen, and 
its sole protection was a broken-down corrugated iron fence. 
Only a few days before he crossed the border. Judge Kotze had 
.1 
told Mr. Newton, with whom, he was travelling that, seeing and 
recognising the serious discontent on the Rand then, he was 
on his way to warn mr. Kruger that, in his opinion, any night 
150 Randites, armed with sticks, could march across to Pretoria, 
seize the Fort, and have the Transvaal in their possession. The 
Rand revolutionists had more than that number, not armed with 
sticks, but thoughly well armed, and thoroughly prepared to 
carry out that very project, which was to have come off on the 
very day he crossed the border". 
The Transvaal only started its armaments when the 
invasion of its territory in time of peace had roused it 
to a sudden knowledge of its danger. 
It was the German Emperor's knowledge that the 
Transvaal was not armed, which caused his Majesty in 
his noble indignation to send to president Kruger the 
historic telegram : 
"I express my sincere congratulatioju that, supported by 
your people and without appealing far the help of Friendly 
Powers, you have succeeded by your own energetic action 
against armed bands which invaded your country as disturbers 
of the peace and have thus been enabled to restore 
peace and safeguard the independence of the country against 
attacks from outside". 
And when after the Raid arms had been ordered for 
the citizens to enable them to defend their country, "the 
security of the Empire" was not threatened by them. 
For it is now known in the whole world, that these 
aggressive Boers" have no army and never had one! 
The best book about the war I know is mr. Howard 
C. Hillegas's With the Boer forces (Methuen). 
Mr. Hillegas acted as war correspondent ol the New 
York World with the Boer Army, and had every oppertunity 
of following the fighting both in Natal and in the 
later battles in the territory of the Republics. 
As a result of his observation and inquiries Mr. Hillegas 
believes that the Boers never had more than 30.000 men 
in the field at one time, and that the average was considerably 
under 25,000. The numbers fluctuated from 
time to time as the farmers deserted or returned to the 
laagers. No such fighting force has ever been seen before, 
nor probably will ever be seen again. It consisted actually 
of the entire male population of the two Republics. No 
/\ 
condition or position was sufficient excuse to remain behind. 
University students, backwoodsmen, millionaires and farmers 
fought'shoulder to shoulder. All were on a common 
footing. These men had no battle cry of revenge. Even 
the name of Jameson appears to have raised no bitter 
feeling. His name, says Mr. Hillegas, was frequently 
heard, but always in a manner which would have led 
one unacquainted with recent Transvaal history to believe 
that he was the patron saint of the Republic. The cry 
of tf Remember Jameson" was not caused by the memory 
of the wrongs which he had committed, but was rather 
a plea to honour him for having placed the Republic on 
its guard against the dangers which threatened it from 
beyond its borders. 
* * 
The Boer army, according to Mr. Hillegass account, 
was one of the most remarkable fighting machines that 
has ever existed. How it ever accomplished anything 
is a mystery ! There was no discipline, punishments could 
not be enforced, and obedience to orders was a purely 
voluntary matter. Burghers, it is true, could be compelled 
to go to the front but no power on earth could compel 
them to fight if they did not choose to do so. It was 
a republican army, composed of republicans, and run on 
republican principles. All officers were elected by public 
vote, but beyond their personal influence they had no 
real authority. There were hundreds of men in the Natal 
laagers, says Mr. Hillegas, who never engaged in one 
battle, and never fired one shot in the first six montns 
of the war. On all disputed questions the majority vote 
decided. A council of war, or krijgsraad, settled the plan 
of campaign and all other military questions. It was composed 
of every officer from corporal to commander-in-chief, 
and the corporal's vote had the same value as a general's : — 
„When there happened to be a deadlock in the balloting at a 
krijgsraad, it was more than once the case that the vote of the 
commandant-general counted for less than the voice of a burgher. 
In one of the minor krijgsraads in Natal there was a tie in the 
voting, which was ended when an old burgher called his corporal 
aside and influenced him to change his vote." 
The decision of the Krijgsraad, however, was not binding. 
It could be. and frequently was, disregarded by 
individual commanders. In any case the officers could 
only call for volunteers to carry out the project resolved 
upon. They could not order their men to fight. If the 
burghers did not approve they did not volunteer. Mr. 
Hillegas mentions one instance. Several days after the 
Spion Kop battle, General Botha called for four hundred 
volunteers to assist in resisting an attack that it was 
feared would be made. There were almost 10.000 men 
in the environs of Ladysmith at that time, but it was 
with the utmost difficulty that the 400 men could be 
gathered. In Natal during the early part of the campaign 
the real fighting spirit was absent. It was not 
till after the capture of Cronje that the burghers polished 
up their rifles and fought with a will. 
What was it that kept this mass of undisciplined men 
together and made them so formidable? 
Mr. Hillegas replies that it was the deeply religious 
feeling which pervaded the whole of the commandoes. 
That, he believes, was the secret of their success : — 
"It was as much his religion as his ability to aim unerringly 
that made the Boer a good soldier. If the Boer army had been 
composed of an irreligious, undisciplined body of men instead 
of the psalming farmers, it would have been conquered by itself. 
The religion of the Boers was their discipline.,, 
Now I ask all men of honour in England, whether the 
dangers with which this handful of peasants, whose 
religion is their discipline, threaten the Britisch Empire 
of Europe, Asia, Africa, America and Australia, are great 
enough to justify a war of extermination and the annexation? 
And it is no argument to mention your losses in this 
war? 
You mourn for the mulitude of slain, forgetting that 
the greatest number of your sons were not killed by the 
bullets of the Boers but by the incurable negligence of 
your own government and by the ineptitude of your 
officers. And that is why your cry for revenge on the 
Boers . . . that is why your longing for burned homes 
and a ruined and depopulated country is a crime as well 
as a delusion ! 
"What ! !" you answer indignant, "we want revenge ?" 
Yes, you* want revenge, revenge for your humiliations, 
your wounded vanity and pride, your loss of prestige 
and honour, revenge for Majuba, revenge for countless 
defeats, surrenders and losses of canon a hundred times 
more shameful than Majuba, revenge for your military 
system broken down., for your army, that has ceased 
to exist as an organised whole. 
And what a noble revenge you take ! 
Think of the way you treat your own subjects in Cape 
Colony ! 
Though there was no rebellion in any part of British 
territory, save where British forces could not give protection, 
and the enemy was left in sole occupation, you 
treat the Cape Dutch as criminals. Is it not true what 
the Speaker observes : 
"Before the war our colonists were assured that our Army was 
able to defend their borders ; during the war we broke our word, 
leaving Dutch-born fellow-subjects to the tender mercies of the 
invader, and in these circumstances the absence of British protection 
and the presence of a kindred race fighting for independence 
combined to undermine loyalty to the Crown; and yet, 
after the war, we are going to infict a punishment for disaffection, 
which was regarded as impossibly severe after the Canadian 
rebellion and to apply it to unwilling acessories who were 
exempted even after the Indian Mutiny." 
What is your defence against this indictment, oh 
Englishmen, who used to pride yourselves on your u free, 
tolerant and unaggressive Empire", but who now condone 
the political job to defranchise and punish thousands of 
Dutchborn Bitish subjects in Cape Colony, thus giving 
the notorious "loyalists" a majority? 
How terrible it is to read about the way honourable 
and innocent men and women are dragooned there. 
The latest information regarding martial law in Cape 
Colony makes it evident that it has been used by the 
Cape politicians, in whose hands it has been placed, in 
order to exasperate and disfranchise as many Dutch as 
possible. The policy is thus succinctly described in a 
letter from a correspondent, who has travelled the, entire 
north-east of the colony within the last few weeks: 
"The game was in many cases to drive men over to the 
enemy; when they wouldn't go they were arrested, in spite, 
whenever a Kaffir could be got to lie about them". 
All who know the nature of the Kaffir, and how easily 
he is induced by fear or mere complaisance to give the 
desired answer, are aware that convictions obtained upon 
such evidence are mere abuses of the forms of legal trial. 
When it is added that agents are employed to approach 
Kaffir servants in order to elicit from them information 
which may incriminate their master some notion of the 
scandals perpetrated in the name of martial law may 
be formed. 
When Mr. A. P. du Plessis protested in the Capehouse 
of Assembly to the effect that his servants were being 
furtively offered rewards to testify against him, the official 
reply was: the servants were only promised their 
"expenses" if they should go and give testimony at 
Steynsburg. Now, Mr. Du Plessis' servants could reach 
Steynsburg in only one of three ways — on foot, by horse 
or conveyance belonging to him, or by transport supplied 
by the spies. There is no railway, and there is no inn 
on the way; so that "expenses" in such a case can stand 
for nothing but reward. The official defence was a farce . . . 
yet Mr. Innes accepted it! 
* * 
Can the English nation think with pride of lord Salisbury's 
: 
u We seek no gold-fields and desire no territory", words 
spoken at the critical moment, when many Colonial Dutch 
thought of going tot heir kinsmen's aid, and refrained from 
doing so because they believed the declaration of the 
English Prime-Minister but words repudiated as soon 
as England's danger passed? Do the English in Canada 
and Australia admire the conduct of English officers, 
turning helpless women and children, as they did at 
Boshoff, out of their homes and then hunting them in 
midwinter into a wilderness 2000 feet above sea level, 
out of the Kaffir dwellings, where they had sought and 
found shelter, and which huts were then destroyed? 
Was it really indispensable to the greatness and power 
of the British Empire to force a mother with a twentyfour 
hour's old baby, to rise and come out and look on 
while her home and possessions were destroyed. She 
was the niece of a lady in Capetown who told of this 
crime. 
Are Alva and Weyler the new King Arthurs of the 
British race? 
In what way is England's treatment of the Dutch in 
the highlands of South Africa to be preferred to the way 
their forefathers were treated in the lowlands of Europe 
by the owners of a former Armada? 
** * 
In Fronde's History of the English in Ireland I read 
about the conquest of Ireland: 
"The English nation were shuddering over the atrocities of the 
Duke op Alva. The children in the nurseries were being inflamed 
to patriotic rage and madness by tales of Spanish tyranny. But 
it was no fault of the English soldiers if any Irish child of that 
generation was allowed to live to manhood ... So desolate became 
Munster that the lowing of a cow or the voice of the ploughman 
was not to be heard that year from Dingle to the Rock of Cashel." 
History repeats itself! The English nation shuddered 
over the atrocities of Weyler and at once imitated him. 
There is, as Froude shows, only one country Europe 
treated so unjustly and so cruelly before and that 
is Ireland! 
Is that example so exilarating that you treat again a 
whole nation as political helots .... that you let men like 
general Brabant, the leader of the Brabanditti, declare 
in the Capehouse of Assembly: ft I regard any one with 
a Dutch name as suspect?" that you let men like 
major Crewe boast: 
a that he had put the whole of the election committee 
of his succesful rival at the last General Election into 
goal, where they remained untried and, for the most part, 
unaccused, a on suspicion"! 
/ 
Even after the honorable way in which Mr. Chamberlain 
has manipulated your own elections we dare to ask : 
do these words and acts redound to your credit? Is it 
not odious to act as you do in Cape Colony against women 
and children, whose husbands and fathers were compelled 
against their will to join in the insurrection, when by 
your bad management and the want of knowledge and 
comonsense of your generals you left them without defence? 
Is it not as stupid as wicked to treat the inhabitants 
of Cape-Colony as rebels, while you cannot contradict 
what Mr. Merriman pointed out: 
"Not many months ago, it is not too much to say, the British 
hold on South Africa lay in the hands of the Dutch Colonists, 
who, had they risen, might have made the military situation 
imposible. At that time their representatives, their ministers of 
religion, and leaders of all classes threw their weight on the side 
of the British connection." 
If the Dutch of Cape colony had joined their kinsmen, 
your army, such at it was, would have been forced to 
surrender, but now you make use ot your hundred thousand 
men to deprive the Dutch of their vote and to govern 
them by terrorism! 
What is the meaning of your terrible cruelty? 
In the Revue des Paris of October Mr. Chevrillon exposes 
the complete inability of the English in the Boer 
war to conceive any point of view other than the purely 
selfish one. 
But what puzzles him most is the astonishing pressing 
even of Christianity itself into the service of imperial 
expansion, 
In the Revue des Revues Mme. Novieoff writes: 
"The English are constantly talking of humanity, and in practice 
they are very often the most inhuman of all nations." 
Fourteen months ago I would have passionately contradicted 
this accusation. 
But now? 
*** 
English mothers, do you realise what is being done in 
South- Africa in the name of a woman, of your own noble 
Queen Victoria? Do you know the meaning of the proud 
news Lord Roberts wired: 
«Lord Methuen has denuded the country round Zeerust?* 
In these words Lords Roberts boasts of the atrocity of 
laying a whole country bare and of making a grey wasteful 
desolation of happy harvest fields and homes. 
What is worse: killing outright as Alva did, or taking 
away the means by which the farmers live and the house 
that shelters their children? 
When there was a fear that the Boers would destroy 
the mines and property of British capitalists in defence 
of their country, how loud was the lamentation in the 
city, and how bloodcurdling its threats and denunciations! 
And now, how does Lord Roberts describe his 
Spanish way of winning the loyalty of men and women, 
whom he wants to exalt to the proud position of his fellow 
subjects? As he says in his second proclamation, he 
feels "compelled to adopt measures which are ruinous to 
the country, entail endless suffering on the burghers and 
their families, and the longer this guerilla warfare continues 
the more rigorously they will be enforced." 
And what are these measures ? Let England's Liberal 
review the Speaker give the answer: 
"The principal one is the burning of farmhouse, where the 
enemy have found shelter in any of the farm buildings, or where 
the railway has been wrecked in the neighbourhood: that is to 
say, that if De Wet or any other leader of a commando, makes 
a swoop upon the railway, or occupies a farm, our gallant Generals, 
who cannot catch De Wet, will take it out of the women and 
children who have commited the crime of living in the neighbourhood. 
The husband and father may be in the fighting line 
or may not: if he be, this method of fighting him is unworthy 
of Englishmen; if he be not it is foolish as well as ignoblo." 
Engeland's reign of terror. 
To make the English people understand the terrible 
mistake that was made by Mr. Chamberlain in goading 
on the boers to war by his bullying style of diplomacy, 
and by lord Roberts adopting the strategy ot Tilly and 
Weyler, I want to show the desolation and misery 
they caused, the appalling nature of which is not yet 
realised in England. 
In giving some examples of the cruel way the English 
troops are desolating the whole country, and of the reign 
of terror which have established, I only quote Englishmen. 
Everything is near, authentic, despicable. Afterwards 
in a book will be published the testimony under 
oath of Boers and Hollanders, Germans and French. For 
the moment I want to prevent the cheap answer that 
my witnesses are enemies of the English. 
As some people might think that the cruelties of the 
English in South Africa began only recently, when the 
guerilla war roused them to despair, I summon as my 
first witness captain Ritchie, who issued on July 9th at 
Krugersdorp this proclamation. 
By order 
T. II 
PUBLIC NOTICE. 
ris hereby notified for information that unless the men 
at present on commando belonging to families in the 
Town and District of Krugersdorp surrender themselves 
and hand in their arms to the Imperal Authorities by 
20 JULY, the whole of their property will be confiscated 
and their families turned out destitute and homeless. 
By Order, 
C. H. M, RITCHIE, 
Capt. K. Horse, 
Dist. Supt. Police. 3 ) 
Krugersdorp, 9 July, 1900. 
3) This is copied from the official proclamation. 
When it was condemned by some influential men at the Cape, it 
was altered a week afterwards as follows: 
V.R. 
Public Notice. 
Notice is hereby given that unless those persons of the town and 
district of Krugersdorp, who are now on commando, surrender them- 
This is a good example of British military rule! How 
noble to tell brave and honourable enemies that, unless 
they desert their countrymen's ranks (for the Transvaal 
was not even annexed yet), their families will be turned 
out destitute and homeless! jr» 
When even some Tories cried :•** Shame!" the proclamation 
was changed, but it had already shown what 
military rule means, and with what cruelty it can threaten 
under the initials of the kindhearted old Victoria 
Regina. 
The special correspondent of the Express, from Bloemfontein, 
writes an article on "Loot a shameless crime". 
He describes a house near Paardeberg: 
"A few regiments of irregular horse swooped down and did 
the work; broken furniture, croockery, pictures, bric-a-brac of all 
kinds, clothing broken glass — everything destroyed — a pitiable 
scene of desolation. In a corner, with its legs twisted out of 
shape, lay a little tin horse, a child's toy — the paint cracked and 
the head bent back to the tall. Even this trifle had been deserving 
of the attention of some stalwart trooper. I picked up a tattered 
Bible, mechanically tearing out a tew more leaves." 
The special correspondent of the Manchester Guardian 
said in riding from Bloemfontein to Kimberley: 
selves and their arms and ammunition and take the oath of neutrality, 
and further declare stock and supplies in their possession, 
before 20 July 1900, the whole of their stock and supplies is liable 
to be confiscated, 
The previous notice in this matter is cancelled. 
By Order, 
G. H. M. Ritchie, 
Capt. K. Horse, 
Dist. Supt. Police. 
Krugersdorp, 16 July, 1900. 
But it came to the same in the end! 
"Scrutator" wrote a fortnight afterwards to The Morning Leader : 
"Both proclamations are alike "By Order"; and when one learns 
that a multitude of women and children were actually deported after 
all, it may be inferred that the cancellation of the first notice is 
simply an act of prudence. It represents a policy deliberately resolved 
on by the authorities ; und we can but ask ourselves to what methode 
we are coming in the Transvaal!" 
"The way is a line of desolation, the farmhouses have not 
merely been sacked, they have been savagely destroyed. The 
mirrors have been smashed, the pianos wrecked, children's toys 
and books wantonly destroyed. Even the buildings themselves 
have been burned and seriously damaged. ' 
Earl de la Warr, correspondent for the Globe, writes 
after the Modder River fight: 
"It is certainly worthy of remark that the Boers, who are not 
supposed to have any discipline at all, have in this part of the 
country (Cape Colony and Free State) apparently behaved with, 
exemplary consideration for the rights of private property." 
A Munster Fusilier, writing to his mother from Honey 
Nest, says: — 
"We have a nice job on hand, going out to the farms for 
firewood — it doesn 't matter what it is. The other day we 
brought in two pianos, a sofa and two dozen chairs what you 
would get ■£ 1 50 for at home — and Billy Jones made short work 
of them to boil our dinner with. All the people have left their 
homes, and we can do what we like with them." 
Another private writing from Modder River Honey 
Kestkloof, says:— 
"We have to go out every morning on what they call looting, 
robbing the farmers' houses of all we can get in the line of 
firewood, breaking up chairs, tables, and even pianos. The farmer's 
houses are splendidly furnished." 
Mr. John Stuart, of the Morning Post, writes of the 
Boer farms: — 
"Wat a scene of loot! We found several rifles. The natives 
of the neighbourhood looted all the furniture and then someone 
without orders set fire to the house. I own to having felt a 
warm glow at the heart when I saw the smoke of that bonfire 
ascending to heaven. A beast of a rebel was getting his deserts. 
Another farm was being looted. Again I had the joy of seeing 
the smoke of a rebel's house ascending". 
This district had sent in months ago a petition to Sir 
A. Milner appealing against the brutality of the English 
troops. 
Mr. Thomas F. Millard, special correspondent with the 
Boer army, sends an account to the Daily Mail of the 
flight to the Vaal River: 
-.4*. 
"Huge waggons, drawn by full spans of trek oxen, piled high 
with farmhouse furniture, where perched wistful-eyed women and 
children, with frightened tear-stained faces; past deserted houses, 
with wildeopen doors and scattered belongings; past ambulances 
filled with groaning wounded. It was bitterly cold. The wind 
had a frost edge and cut to the quick. Thinly-clad women 
clasped their shivering babes. Heartrending as was this enforced 
and huried abandonment of homes, few hesitated to make the 
sacrifice. Anything was better than to fall into the hands of 
the hated English!" 
Private Fred Bonsor of the Imperial Yeomanry writes : 
"Of course, all farms and houses on our way are looted, 
burned down and destroyed. It looks an awful shame, and the 
scenes are simply sickening at times, when some poor women 
try hard to save something for themselves and their children; 
but we cannot pass over the fact that their husbands, fathers and 
sons are all away fighting against us day after day. It really 
looks terrible when, glancing back on the way, you see smoke 
and flames all along the sky-line, and shadows of women and 
kids running about trying to save something." 
*£ 
The u of course", with which private Bonsor begins, is 
a noble tribute to England's way of subdoing a free 
people ! 
In the article which Mr. Conan Doyle wrote for the 
Strand Magazine of September I came across a sketch of 
the looting of a Free State farm from which shots had 
been fired on the troops: 
"The general rides up, but he has no consolation for the 
women. The farm has brought it upon itself. He rides on. 
A parson rides up. "I can't imagine why they don't burn 
it," says he." 
The Levite of the English church not only passes the 
wounded man but wishes to finish him! 
How the war has warped good sense and good feeling ! 
How terrible the ever gathering popularity of ignorant 
brute force and the nearly total absence of a watchful 
and temperate opinion at home! 
xm 
Many on the British side put no disguise on their satisfaction 
over vindictive measures. I have before me the 
„Cape Argus of 21 June, in which there is cited this 
statement from the South African News: 
71 
,;-#X 
>xw 
3§£sx 
■- &5- 
:% 
%. 
M 
®|8# 
&'* 
"Between Bloemfontein and Boshof, between 30 and 40 homesteads 
have been burnt down— utterly destroyed. That is only 
one route. Many others have beent burnt down also. Their homes 
destroyed, women and children have been turned out on to the 
field in the bitter South African winter." 
To this allegation not a word of denial is offered by 
the a Argus," Without a hint of repudiation, it proceeds : 
"When our troops have been fired at from farmhouses flying 
the white flag, when arms have been found concealed, and when 
Boers who have taken the oath of neutrality have violated that 
oath, it is only to be expected that sharp and summary punishment 
would be inflicted as a warning to others." 
Here we have the implicit claim that the misdeeds of Boers 
are fitly to be punished at the hands of a British force 
by turning out their women and children to freeze to 
death in the winter fields. When this is openly argued, 
it can be felt how many acts of extreme vindictiveness 
have been committed. 
* * * 
"Scrutator" writes from Cape town to the Morning 
Leader: 
"After getting hundreds to surrender on a proclamation, 
Lord Roberts holds himself at liberty to cancel his 
promises because certain individuals have broken faith. 
In strict fact his agreement was with individuals as such, 
and he has no more right to throw over two on the score 
of the bad faith of one than the civil power has right to 
punish one man for another's crime. It is merely martial 
law in excelsis — the will of the general overriding every 
principle of equity. A concrete case, reported in a loyalist 
telegram, will serve to show how things are going in 
the Transvaal". 
Johannesburg, 17 Aug. — On Tuesday evening Pte. Richards, 
of the Railway Pioneers, was mysteriously shot near Witpoortje, 
four miles from Krugersdorp. He was doing patrol duty, and 
when picked up yesterday he had five bullet wounds including 
one through the head. As he was sniped by some resident in 
the vicinity, the people were called upon to produce the murderer. 
As they did not, some four houses were demolished, and the 
occupants sent to Johannesburg. 
The crime, be it observed, was u mysterious" ; that is 
to say, nobody knows who did it. But for purposes of 
martial law it is assumed that "some resident in the vicinity" 
is guilty and as nobody can pretend to identify 
that resident, four houses are at once demolished, and 
four families sent to Johannesburg. Thus are Boers taught 
to realise and revere the majesty of British justice. You 
first penalise some 50 people at random, and afterwards 
you may perhaps put them on trial. 
Had Lord Roberts resolutely adhered to his first policy 
of clemency, and disdained to break his public promise 
of protection and immunity to all who surrendered, he 
would have made himself respected. 
But he has given a free hand to the farmburners ♦ . . 
penalised helpless and disarmed people for damage done 
to the railway in their district by flying bands ... he 
has even resorted to the evil expedient of placing innocent 
neutrals on his trains to receive the fire of their 
armed countrymen. The result is that the credit of 
British fairness is gone for ever in South- Africa. War was 
made against women and children. The Burghers were 
evicted from Pretoria. Listen to the beautiful way in 
which Reuter's correspondent at Pretoria describes this 
Christian act of war: 
"It has of late been apparent to the British military authorities 
here that among a great number of poor in the town, who were 
being fed practically tree of charge, were the wives of many 
burghers now actually in the field against us. Even to British 
magnanimity there must be some limit (!) and to-day a proclamation 
has been issued ordering the wives of all Boers now fighting 
to report themselves to the authorities tomorrow in order 
that they may be sent into the enemy's lines." 
These mothers and children were deprived of their 
own houses and beds . . . were driven from a place of 
safety into the field of active warfare. Nobody could 
pretend that these women are the wives of rebels and 
traitors. 
What a way to convert the Dutch into submissive 
subjects ! 
Lord Roberts certainly took up Longfellow's Evangeline 
after his courageous sortie against women. It must have 
comforted him that the English were already just as 
brutal under George I. 
How charmed he will have been when be read of that 
awful eviction of Acadians, or Nova Scotians, as described 
in "Evangeline" . . . when he read the prefatoiy note to 
the poem and the description of how the Acadians were 
scattered in different colonies, relations and friends being 
purposely separated! This was in 1714. 
Now it is the jubilee year 1900! 
Lord Roberts, continuing his policy of ferocity, and as 
if he had not done harm enough already by breaking 
his pledge of protection and immunity to individual 
burghers of the Free State, who have surrendered, formally 
rescinded all previous proclamations in the Transvaal, 
and announces that: 
"all the burghers in the districts occupied by the British forces^ 
except those who have taken the oath will be regarded as prisoners 
of war, and will be transported^ 
And his soldiers understand what he wants. 
Here is an extract from a letter written by an English 
soldier: 
"We have got a force of irregulars working round the district, 
all mounted infantry, and their orders seem to be, as far as I 
can make out, "Shoot, loot, and burn. They returned after 
three days' excursion yesterday, having had one man killed and 
about twelve farms burnt. I reckon this game will do more to 
bring the Boers to their senses than anything else!" 
The St. James's Gazette printed a letter from its correspondent 
at Ficksburg in the Orange Free State. He is 
a violent Anti-Boer. But his criticisms are none the less 
damaging to the English! 
He is a partisan of rigor. Like the Standard he regards 
De Wet and his followers as "brigands", who ought to 
be "shot or hanged". 
But he complains that the English authorities are inconsistent. 
Proclamations are for ever being issued, now 
lenient, now severe, but each invariably contradicting its 
predecessor. To-day we dismiss a man to his farm on 
parole, to morrow we burn his hay and take him prisoner. 
The result is that whereas : 
"Six months ago at least a third of the Free Staters were in 
our favor, now it is doubtful if we possess a single friend." 
The writer attributes this result to "inconsistency". 
But here is his description of a march with General Campbell's 
column: 
"The General told me thad he had received orders to "sweep" 
the country All farms on the line of march were cleared 
of horses cattle, sheep, waggons, carts, &o., the forage being 
burnt, and the owners bidden to join the ranks of the prisoners, 
of whom there were already a goodly number. In several cases 
I ventured humbly to point out that many of these men, in fact 
most of them, had been paroled and allowed to return to their 
farms, and had received a protection certificate for their property 
from the District Commissioner. Some of them were Britishers, 
&c My pleas were of no avail." 
This is the Pax Britannica! 
The following is an extract from a letter from a soldier 
dated Kroonstad, September 23 which I read in Reynold's 
Newspaper of 28 October: "I have been on a thirty-four 
days' patrol, fired only eight shots all the time, was sent 
with 100 men burning farms and looting all stock, burnt 
twenty-eight farms. I wish I could have brought some 
of the stuff home we burnt in that trip." 
This is the description given by the special correspondent 
of the Manchester Guardian, with Colonel Mahon. 
■# 
"In ten miles we have burned no fewer than six farmhouses ; 
the wife watched from her sick husband's bedside the burning 
of her home a hundred yards away. It seems as though a kind 
of domestic murder were being committed. I stood till late last 
night and saw the flames lick round each piece of the poor 
furniture — the chairs and tables, the baby's era die, the chest of 
drawers, containing a world of treasure, and when I saw the 
poor housewife's face pressed against the window of the neighbouring 
hause, my own heart burned with a sense of outrage. 
The effect on the Colonial troops who are gratifying their feelings 
of hatred and revenge, is very bad. They swarm into the 
houses, looting and destroying, and filling the air with high 
sounding cries of vengeance. Why burn the houses — the ends 
achievd are so small, punishment, could be otherwise inflicted? 
If I described one-half of the little things wich I saw in the 
process of destruction, I should be accused of sentimentalising," 
1 
X-+ 
*, 
X3f; 
X|? 
•s« 
M 
m 
$£ 
-- j&& 
;,J| 
m 
.:■" * . x^?f 
,i * v ' v *' • " %/ " "t-rs- ■s'S"-,^ *•"- - V* *"--." * '~\-~ $>'&'?&*'*' ~z -~ -^•*f- p* ,*rl 
Mr. Battersby, in the Morning Post, June 30, writes. 
"The dismantling of deserted houses is a speedy affair. The 
doors are smashed from their hinges, lintel and side-posts wrenched 
from the brickwork, the flooring is torn up, sometimes even 
the roof tree is dragged out, chairs, tables, and chests of drawers 
may be seen going into camp on the backs of the spoilers. The 
whole place is gutted with a passion for destruction." 
The special correspondent of the Morning Leader Mr. 
E. W. Smith, writes: 
"General French and General Pole-Carew, at the head of the 
Guarde and eighteenth brigade, are marching in, burning practycaUy 
everything on the road. 
"I hear to-day that General Rundle burnt his way up to 
Dewetsdorp. At one farm only women were left. Still riffles 
were found under the mattress. Orders were inexorable. The 
woman threw her arms round te officers neck and begged that 
the homestead might be spared. When the flames burst from 
the doomed place the poor woman herself on her knees, tore 
open her bodice, and bared her breasts, screaming: "Shoot 
me — shoot me! I've nothing, more to live for now that my husband 
is gone, and our farm is burnt and our cattle taken!" 
Private Stanley, of the X. S. W. contingent, writes to 
the Sydney Telegraph: 
"When within 800 yards of the farm we halted and the 
infantry blazed a volley into the house ; we broke open the place 
and went in. It was beautifully furnished and the officers got 
several things they could make use of. There was a lovely 
library — books of all descriptions, printed in Dutch and English. 
I secured a bible, also a rifle, quite new. After getting all we 
wanted out of the house, our men put a sharge under and blew 
it up. It seemed such a pity, it was a lovely house." 
A letter of a Trooper Morris, published September 
6, 1900: 
"Since we are with Clements we have had plenty of work, 
burning farms, destroying crops, and commandeering cattle. It 
is very hard sometimes, but is must be done. Last Sunday six 
of us, including myself, went out with an Imperial officer to a 
fine farmhouse, giving the occupants five minutes to clear out all 
their goods as well as themselves. There were an old grandmother, 
three married daugthers, and several children, crying and 
asking for mercy ; but no. And when the time was up we burnt 
it to the ground". 
The South African News of September 5 th published a 
Proclamation issued at Bloemfontein, numbered 602, which 
runs as follows: — 
"Notice. 
"Whereas, by Proclamation, dated the i6th day of June, 1 900. 
of Lord Roberts, Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief Her Majesty's 
Forces in South Africa, it was notified to, and the inhabitants 
and principal residents of the Orange River Colony and the South 
African Republic were warned, that whatever wanton damage to 
public property, such as Railways, Bridges, Culverts, Telegraph 
Wires, &c, took place the houses of persons living in the neighbourhood 
would be burned, inasmuch as such destruction could 
not take place without their knowledge and connivance, now, 
therefore, it is hereby notified for general information that the 
following sentences have been passed in connection with destruction 
of Property, Railways, &c, in the Orange River Colony, 
and have been approved by Field-Marshal Lord Roberts." 
There follows a list of some forty persons whose farms 
have been burnt in accordance with Lord Roberts' Proclamation. 
It is difficult to see how these men can be 
made responsible for the attacks on the railway. The 
mobile Boer forces cover huge distances, descend on the 
railway at one point, and in a few days are able to 
attack the railway in some other direction. The Boers 
whose farms are burnt have not the slightest responsibility 
for the destruction of the railway. 
All what I here tell is a reprint of what I wrote in 
the Amsterdam Handelsb 7 ad. 
But since has appeared the Memorial addressed to 
Lord Salisbury by the South African Concilation Committee: 
of which Mr. Leonard Courtney is President. 
In this Memorial I read that on September 2nd Lord 
Roberts addressed a letter to General Botha informing 
him that he had actually given orders for the burning 
of all farmhouses near the spot where any attempt had 
been made to injure trains or railways, and that for ten 
miles round every farm should be denuded of all provisions, 
cattle, &c. He further informed him that, in consequence 
of guerilla fighting, and for the prevention of 
xv;yx:x * / --:..x>- » •„ M^^.^^-uV^.-k 
intelligence being transmitted to the enemy, he proposed 
to expel from all towns and places occupied by British 
troops the wives and families of burghers in the field. 
He asked General Botha to make provision for receiving 
these outcast women and children, mentioning amongst 
them Mrs. Kruger and Mrs. Botha by name. General 
Botha replied that the Boer commandos were all acting 
under his direction, that they were necessarily small, 
and that they were scattered, "in order to be able to 
check the looting patrols under your Excellency's chief 
command, who scour the country to carry off cattle and 
provisions from the different farms." He added: — 
"With regard to paragraph 4 of your Excellency's letter, I 
extremely regret to learn that my burghers' and my own determination 
to persevere in the strugge for our independence is to 
be visited on our wives and children, and this is the first 
instance of this kind known to me in the history of civilised 
warfare. I can only protest against your proposed measures as 
being in opposition to all principles of civilised warfare and 
excessively cruel towards the women and children. I desire to 
give you the assurance that nothing you may do to our women 
and children will deter us in the struggle for our independence." 
The increasing rigour of the measures adopted by 
Lord Roberts is illustrated by each day's intelligencn 
from South Africa. October closed with the news of the 
burning of all the Boer houses between Vryheid and 
Dundee — a distance of upwards of fifty milos ; the complete 
destruction of Bothaville and Ventersbarg, and the 
imprisonment of many Dutch Reformed ministers, the 
effect of the last-named step being to deprive infants of 
baptism and grown-up persons of those spiritual ministrations 
which are deeply valued by them. 
A further advance on the road of severity is seen in 
a Renter's special telegram of October 30, which announces 
that every male Boer over fourteen years of age 
outside a radius of ten miles of Bloemfontein is being 
"coralied" or "concentrated" into Bloemfontein. Their 
women and children are being carried away hundreds 
of miles into the Cape Colony. A still farther development 
of this drastic policy is to be found in a proclamation, 
stated to have been isued from Bloemfontein on October 
■^S^^^^M^s^^m 
-i:-*i'^&X=>c.X:5 «*" 
* -^ v^^^^v 7 - 1 
ifSSS^^^^^^^^^^^^ 
'".-"' 29 ' / ' : ' C '• : 
24, requiring all farmers to scour eveiy night the vicinity *' \ 
of their farms, to prevent "sniping." Failure to eompy ' v 
with this order subjects the farmers first to a fine of }■[ 
£ 200, and secondly to the burning of their farms. A .::-moment's 
consideration of the large areas of the Boer 
farms and the mobility of the Boer commandos reveals :■?-the 
difficult situation thus thrust upon the unfortunate 
farmers. * 
It is indeed * difficult to realise how the character of 
the struggle has passed from phase to phase. As now * - 
developed, it involves the burning of farms and even of : ; 
villages, the denudation of whole districts of stock and 
crop, the deportation of the women and children left ? 
homeless, some of them over the borders, some into the . j£\ 
remoter parts of the Transvaal, and some apparently a 
about to be driven into the ranks of the companies of 
the enemy still in the field. 
A telegram from Port Elizabeth states that 160 women and 
children, deported by the military authorities, chieflly from the * 
Edenburg district, arrived there this morning. 
Ventersburg had been destroyed (Nov. i). 
Renter. 
"It is not pleasant to hear that in some cases which have been *A 
investigated it has been shown that Transvaal and Free State 
farms which have been found to be without male inhabitants and 
have accordingly been burned on the supposition that the owner -v K 
was on commando have really belonged to Boers who were our *■ 
prisoners in St. Helena or elsewhere." 
Manchester Guardian. (6 Nov.) 
* * 
I am tired copying all this atrocious news about the, 
way England wages war, and I leave piles of letters and 
newspapers cuttings unused, describing barbarities worthy , ~; 
of a Tilly in the seventeenth century not of a British 
general in the year 1900. 
But before indicating the cause of all these cruel expe- <- t ~. 
dients, it is necessary to ask what induced English jour- 
V ~„~, *~ * M ~V, V ~~~ .J — — - — 0 0 j. 
naliste in this crisis to excite the soldiers far off to use iw 
a violence, which is not a cement but a* wedge? " 1 
What is the meaning of all this cruelty, of goading the x $ 
Dutch population in Capecolony to hostility of exter- 
3§ 
:ni- 
r^^c^Jk x fc^Sis: # *4£K3& 
->i ''Jsr, .v.- , i4 **-'~:-U.'& ~**±.. j.zS&'^S 
minating the Dutchmen from Capetown to the Zambesi? 
What can induce so many gentlemen to lie and slander, 
to conceal the truth about the Boers, to exult in all their 
weaknesses, to sneer at their heartfelt, simple religious 
faith and laugh at their bitter sorrows, insulting their 
president, and shooting at his effigy, as Sir Alfred Milner 
did? 4 ) 
What makes them ask for the appointment of this same 
Sir Alfred Milner — who showed himself shortsighted, 
impatient, intolerant, irritating his adversaries, and never 
losing the chance to insult the Dutch — as satrap over 
the vanquished people, thus committing the honour of 
the lady to the care of the ravisher? 
We ask the English people the question asked before : — 
do the exigences of your own safety justify the crimes 
committed in your name ? 
the use of surrendered burghers from the Free State 
as shields for your own soldiers in your trains? .... 
the systematic barbarity threatened by Lord Robert's 
proclamations ? 
Have you the right before God and men to deport in 
captivity to far off islands, far from their family thou- 
4) Son Excellence s amuse. 
My attention was drawn to sir Alfred's amusements by the following 
words of The Star: 
"We may remind the reader of the description in the Cape Times 
of how sir Alfred Milner, the representative of the Queen, appeared 
at a garden-party in Cape Town, and amid the delighted guffaws of 
the wealthy vulgar took potshots at an effigny of President Kruger. 
Extract from a "Cape Times" report of a garden party given by 
the Admiral and Lady Harris at Simon's Town on Monday afternoom, 
at which his ExceUency the Governor was present: 
"On the. top row a cardboard image of Oom Paul -with a top hat 
and Vierkleur sash complete — scowled at the detested English. Near 
him a spectacled, much-moustached infant in short frock, crawled on 
a visionary floor (Mr. Morriman). To the right a very tall person with 
a stoop, a cynical smile, and telescopic boots, had a good position on 
the line (Mr. James Molteno). These were targets for all who chose 
to try their skill ;with a Lee-Metford, fitted with the Morris tube. 
Pr. Kruger's presentment was soon like a sieve, and there w T ere scores 
of little round holes in the other figures. His Excellency made good 
practise with the rifle" 
'A% : ~4l£^££&& 
sands and thousands of men, whose only crime was to 
fight for their independence? 
I read in the Westminster Gazette that De Wet became 
an irreconcilable only when Lord Kitchener burnt his 
farmhouse. Standing amid the ruins, he did what nine 
men of spirit in ten would have done— he vowed to be 
revenged. 
Does it never occur to England's generals that confiscating 
and burning the private property of those who 
are lawfully in arms against them, is specifically forbidden 
by the Hague Convention, which Lord Salisbury's government 
has ratified, and to wich the Boers were not a 
party for the simple reason that Mr. Chamberlain, 
foreseeing the war, excluded them from the debates and 
divisions in "the House in the Wood". 
/ 
As Mr. Charles Williams wrote: 
"Lord Kitchener has a good many things to answer for, if he 
ever comes home, and among the three most serious of them is 
questions why he avenged himself on the property of Christian 
De Wet on account of that Boer's superior tactical ability". 
Though the whole world knows by this time what 
cruelties can be expected of lord Kitchener, I ask again, 
why this terrible outrage? 
a Destroy their tombs" was the latest cry of the Standard" 
and other Tory-papers, who wanted to demolish and 
pollute the burial grounds of the Chinese, part of whose 
religion is their reverence for their ancestors. 
This Christian way of subduing enemies by grubbing 
up their graves and decapitating their dead was first 
followed in the Kitchener experiment of digging up the 
remains of the Mahdi, and boiling his head in an old 
oil can. But it is a new thing to read how English papers 
of standing encourage such cruel acts. 
The greatest part of your English press has utterly 
disgraced itself during their war. 
It can never be believed again! Their war has been 
a series of impostures from beginning to end. 
Stoneblind to whatever they did not mean to see, they 
allowed what Russell Lowell calls "the mythic instinct" 
to shape things as they ought to have been. 
I read with delight mr. Michael Davitt's statement that 
t 
% 
>* 
•A,-, 
lie proposes to embody in a chapter of a work on "The 
Boer Story of the War 71 the number, character, and variety 
of the lies, which were circulated both immediately before 
and during the war by the jingo Press of England 
and of the Cape. He has the same task before him as 
confronted Hercules when he stood before the stables of 
Augeas. So "more power to his elbow", as I once heard 
an Irishman say, for he is right in saying, that a a more 
monstrous and more unblushing use of falsehood in the 
service of an infamous cause has never been chronicled 
in the history of politics or of warfare than can be thus 
compiled." 
But while I found them exceedingly careless as to 
exact truth, exalting fierce personal bias as Imperialistic 
patriotism, I never believed that it was possible British 
journalists would ever become advocates of the way Alva 
tried to subdue Holland an Zeeland. 
Alas, it were not only Lord Roberts and Lord Kitchener, 
who in panic and despair imitated General Weyler's 
methods in Cuba . . . no, your newspapers egged them 
on! The Morning Post is convinced that nothing would 
be so effective as a system of loot . . . the St. James's 
Gazette (Monday 18 August) welcomes general Weyler's 
method as the only, effective one . . . 
"as the imitation imposed by necessity of the draconic measure 
by which the Spanish Captain-General endeavoured to pacify the 
Pearl of the Antilles . . . but it would be far better to adopt the 
policy of thorough at once, and "reconcentrate" the whole Dutch 
population of "the Transvaal at St. Helena or in Ceylon." 
In the Saterday Review of 3 November I read : 
"It is satisfactory to hear that the houses of the inhabitants of 
Palmietspruit who admitted the Boers have been destroyed." 
The Standard, the advocate of the systematic devastation 
which lord Roberts practises in South- Africa, wrote 
on Friday 2 November: 
"The burning of houses in very unpleasant wotd. It is costly 
and repulsive to our feelings te be compelled to remove the 
population and confine them in pens." 
*V7/ -\^\Ju ~^r- :^^J^^^J&^ 
* 
But we are convinced that the paper would have added, 
if Frenchmen had been guilty of these barbarities: 
X?;# 
"It is not only costly but it is a confession of weakness, a 
cruel practice forbidden by the code of honour of civilised nations !" 
* 
Mr. Sidney Lamont, the correspondent of the Daily 
Express gave six weeks ago the following advice to lord 
Roberts, which he has nearly completely followed since: 
«* 
"If the present state of things goes on, I would advocate a 
policy of absolute devastastion, followed by subsequent compensation. 
Occupy all the principal touns — hold the rails and raze 
the villages and farm to the ground. Destroy all growing crops, 
and do not leave a mouthful of food for man or beast in an 
entire district ... It sounds very terrible such a wholesale policy 
of destruction. But in reality it would not be so bad as it sounds. . . 
We could destroy more than a thousand farms a day for the same 
price as it now costs us to carry on the war for 24 hours." 
i 
-? 
3 
The Standard of 16 October goes one better. 
That Tory paper lowered the newpaper press of England 
in the sight of the world by urging that the prisoners 
taken in the war should be put to death ! The suggestion 
that every burgher in arms should be killed is abominably 
cruel. If it were acted on, England would become 
a pariah among the nations. 
-* 
* A * 
To these murderers in armchairs I say: the heroes of 
. the two Republics are only doing what each nation of 
freemen believes and hopes and prays their own sons 
would do, if an enemy refused to treat with its government, 
simply proclaiming the whole country with its mines and 
men and women to be his property. 
The English make war in the manner of Nebuchadnezar 
it is a war of annihilation they want to 
imprison a whole Christian . nation of noble European 
descent . . . they want to finish the vile war, not by an 
honorable treaty but by the proclamation of a military 
despot. What can men, who love their country and their 
homes, whose farms are burned, whose wives and children 
are homeless and destitute, who have only imprisonment, 
humiliation and servitude before them, wat can they do 
m 
L i 
i 
:4? 
S^fe^^i^ 
but fight to the bitter end, and continue a war which 
costs their enemy, who knows neither generosity nor 
justice, two hondred lives and two millions of money 
every week? 
The raiding of the Boers is a perfectly legitimate act 
of war. 
xjAt the conference in the Hague Sir John Ardagh *) has 
been pleading eloquently, as the representative of Great 
Britain, for the fullest measure of rights which a population 
ean claim in resisting invaders! 
And how do English generals bring their acts in harmony 
with the honeyed words of their sleek statesmen? 
The Boers go on fighting because it is a sacred duty 
to struggle to the end in defence of language, hearth and 
home and independence. 
But the English Imperialists wage a war of greed and 
revenge, without any regard for the patriotism that others 
feel as much as Englishmen. 
Is there an insult so unbearable as the one the Daily 
News inflected on the courageous warriors for liberty? 
That paper, once edited by men of principle, who believed 
*) The clauses of the Hague Convention which deal with the 
subject are clear and definite. Sir John Ardagh, one of England's 
representatives, proposed on behalf of Great Britain — "Nothing in this 
chapter shall be considered as tending to lessen or suppress the rights 
which belong to the population of an invaded country to fulfil its 
duty of opposing the invaders by all lawfull means, with the most 
energetic patriotic resistance" — (Peace Conference Blue-book. October, 
1899, p. 161.) 
The Convention itself provides — 
Art. 44: Any compulsion of the population of occupied territory 
to take pert in military operations against its own country is prohibited. 
Art. 45 : Any pressure on the population of occupied territory to 
take the oath to the hostile Power is prohibited. 
Art. 46: Family honours and rights, individual lives and property, 
as well as religious convictions and liberty, must be respected. Private 
property cannot be confiscated. 
Art. 47 : PUlage is formaUy prohibited. 
Art. 50: No general penalty, pecuniary or otherwise, can be inflicted 
on the population on account of the acts of individuals for which 
it cannot be regarded as coUectively responsible. 
X^-- - .^ A44X^-.//^;^ t t ~*i *v^V'flC.^V^i, 
in Jliberty, congratulated the Boers upon the beginning 
of a "new era", for now, after a period of tyranny and 
military rale, they are going to obtain that true independence, 
that real enjoyment of the blessings of self-government, 
which they have so long been denied. Now at 
length they are to obtain "administration on the principles 
of equality and justice and self government." 
And this to the sturdy heroes, who tor the sake of 
their independence, their religion and language have 
u trekked" and fought and died for nearly a whole century. 
If their claim to a national existence was worth an 
80 years war in Europa and an endless struggle in Africa, 
it is worth maintaining at any cost against Rhodes and 
Chamberlain! 
The Daily News, false to its traditions, writes as if 
nationalism were a dead abstraction as if patriotism 
had been annexed by force and frand as the exclusive 
possession of British Imperialists, as if love for our 
country, its language, laws, past and 'future were not a 
living virtue in the moral nature of us, Hollanders, and 
of those of our blood, raising an ideal for all men of 
action. 
What poor argument it is for robbing the Dutch of 
their independence to say that it was of little value! 
Is it any defence of the honesty of a housebreaker to 
urge that what he had stolen, after killing the housekeeper, 
was of little value to the owner? 
What is good enough for Birmingham is not good enough 
for Pretoria, just as what is good enough for Louisiana 
is not considered good enough by the Canadians. 
What miserable talk is this ! 
Does this renegade of Liberalism really believe he can 
soothe a high-spirited nation, descendents of the men who 
in 1672 fought Great Britain and France, leagued together 
against them, by the ignouimous delusion; that after 
a, time some liberty may be thrown to them, and that 
the best way of securing liberty is first to lose it? 
Are these flunkeys of imperialism satisfied with wearing 
the livery of the Jingoes, because they may get leave to 
lay it aside some evening after a carouse of mafficking, 
when their services are no longer wanted? Are they 
happy in doing penal servitude under Chamberlain be- 
■w^-* **-*--» Vu* v-/~* v** v^.^Tv J J*v A*V,* *V%-'f* v 4^--^ 
iiti 
cause some day, if they are submissive enough, they may 
get a ticket of leave? 
It is a grand thing for a "Liberal" paper to snarl in 
praise of a policy, which is a dissolution of all liberal 
principles, and which culminates in the ruin of a nation, . . . 
a glorious thing to crouch to the strong, encroaching on 
the feeble, howling with the mob and hunting up excuses 
for what strikes all lovers of liberty as one of the greatest 
crimes in history! 
What honour for the paper, that once was proud to 
echo Gladstone's trumpet-ones and the reveil he sounded, 
when he saw a nation oppressed, to adulate Roman Imperaiism 
and to try to crush nationalities at the frontier, 
not with a temporary prostration merely but with utter 
desolation and dissolution ! 
The cause of all the cruelty. 
The reason for all the crimes committed in South-Africa 
by the British is known on the continent and in America, 
though hidden to the Engilsh nation by the Rhodesian 
press. 
There is no reason for sugaring the bitter truth to 
you. 
The political witches, who met Mr Chamberlain on the 
road from Birmingham to London, have ruined his reputation 
and the happiness of South- Africa with their : "All 
hail hereafter!" 
His endeavour to consolidate the different parts of the 
Empire, which he believes he has discovered, by a complicity 
of blood, proves a mistake. 
As Shakespeare said : ' there is no sure foundation set 
on blood". 
A handful of farmers and shop boys, of untrained peasants 
without cohesion, officers, and discipline has led 
captive 5000 of England's best regulars, capturing guns 
and convoy, and forcing the ministers to denude England 
and India of almost every soldier of the regular army, 
and to implore for help and volunteers in Europe, Asia, 
Africa, America and Australia! 
They have wrecked your military system and broken 
your influence throughout the world. 
To save what could be saved Lord Roberts was sent 
to annihilate the people you could not conquer. 
But Lord Roberts, just as your whole army, has been 
spoiled by easy wars against frontiermen in India, and 
against African warriors, armed with spears. 
He has been so long accustomed to lording it over 
cringing natives, that he had continually to rub his eyes, 
now that he had continually to rub his eyes, now that 
he had to deal with a people of European descent, moved 
to great deeds by an independence centuries old. 
His strategy, which is a wonder in your eyes, showed 
the same kind of desperation that was visible in Mr. 
Chamberlain's mode of appeal to the country . . quick, 
or it is too late! 
He disdained to make each step secure before taking 
the next ... he cut himself adrift from a sate line of 
communication with his base he staked everything 
on the one throw of a headlong rash to Bloemfontein 
and Pretoria . . . and he lost the reality for the shadow. 
You try to make believe he is a new Wellington . . . 
but he could not even protect the Bloemfontein waterworks 
. . . Olivier and the large convoy escaped him . . . 
he had to pay for his hurry by long months of humiliating 
inaction and the owners of the goldmines, for the 
protection of which he sacrified thousands ot English lives, 
are still waiting for permission to work them. 
By his reckless hurry he wrecked the hospital and 
transport systems and so he maimed and killed his own 
soldiers by hundreds after terrible sickness and suffering. . . 
in despair of honorable victory he was driven from one 
barbarity to another ... he forced the Boers to the tactics 
that are the best for them and the worst for yoa. 
Certainly, he did not risk one terrible defeat, one 
Waterloo by his unscientific strategy, as he outnumbered 
by ten to one the Boers, who had no organised army, 
but his strategy forced him to be cruel in South Africa 
as before he had been in Afghanistan. 
By his way of making war he has incumbered the 
potitical with an economic problem. He has destroyed 
wealth, harvestfields, farms, and means to live wholesale. . . 
does the ruin of a whole country of labouring men and 
farmers spell the glory of the reckless and despairing 
conqueror? 
Those who know Lord Roberts say that notwithstandig 
his cruel proclamations in practise he does his best to 
be humane in the performance of a task that is essentially 
inhuman. 
But I ask them: do you claim Lord Roberts' kindness 
of heart as a sanctuary for his crime against humanity? 
What do we care for the smoothness of a tree if it 
bears poisonous fruit? 
Your House of Parliament ought to be surrounded with 
a grim frieze of murderous scenes, towns burned, women 
and children destroyed, as a history of Lord Robert's 
glorious war. 
* i 
Do you know what Lord Roberts has done? 
At the Conference of clergymen of the Dutch Reformed 
Church, held in Cope Town the other day, the presiding 
clergyman said : 
"J was always loyal. ... at the time of her Majesty" Jubilee I 
spoke of our loyalty and devotion to her throne and person, and 
we carried resolutions to that effect. Today I am only loyal 
because 1 have to be, and I don't care who knows it"'. 
This clergyman had been all the time in Cape Town, but 
what he had heard of the horrors the British troops 
committed has turned him and all the men of Dutch 
descent against the English 
By their treatment of the Dutch in Cape Colony the 
English statesmen and generals have started a movement, 
which we may call the birth of a new nationalism. What 
does mr Merriman say, he a member of the late Cape 
Ministry, an Englishmen, "son of perhaps the most respected 
Bishop, who erer lived in South Africa", as one 
of your Reviews calls him ? 
He spoke in support of Mr. Sauer's motion in favour 
of granting a qualified indepence to the Boer States. A 
verbatim report of the speech was published in the South 
African News of September 26th, and should be read by 
every one who desires to understand the intense feeling 
£«*>*. 
of antagonism, which has been aroused among Africanders 
by the policy of Mr. Chamberlain & Sir Alfred Milner. 
He said: % 
VI have lived to see my country — that country which stood two 
years ago horrified at the doings of the infamous General Weyler 
in Cuba, applauding that same General, and saying through the 
mouth of one of its influential London newspapers that those 
are the ways which must be followed in the Free State and the 
Transvaal — that is degradation indeed. England has indeed 
fallen from her high estate when such things can be written 
and said. (Opposition cheers). 
"One of the most remarkable things about this war is that it 
is a war a ontrance; no terms are to be given, and I am 
surprised to hear members talking about the Boers' fruitless 
resistance. I wish some opportunity was given to these people 
to stop this miserable blooshed by offering them some reasonable 
terms. But no terms are offered ; they are pursued hither and 
thither; they are to be utterly wiped out. The war is carried 
on as no war has been carried on, I suppose, since the days of 
Tilly and Wallenstein, except by the inflamous General Weyler. 
That is not the way to get a high-spirited people to give in. 
We have all read of the 300 Spartans and other Greeks who feU 
at Thermopylae. No doubt they knew they were fighting a 
hopeless battle. No doubt many of their friends said to them 
that they should have gone round some other way and not 
thrown their lives away', but they handed down their names to 
posterity, and I will venture to say that the burghers of the 
Free State and the Transvaal, when we here are dead and our 
miserable little political squabbles are forgotten, will be remembered 
in history as these men of Thermopylae^ are remembered. 
(Loud Opposition cheers.)" 
"I warn Great Britain against, the policy of annexation 
Some people talk light-heartedly about the solemn act of taking 
away the life of a nation, but 1 look upon is as something like 
murder upon the individual. T tell you what you are going to 
do by annexation ; you are going to make England lose South 
Africa; that is the plain English of it, Mr. Speaker and it is 
better for us to speak out. Annex these people to-day, and as 
sure as you do England is going to lose South Africa, and 
something much worse is going to happen — South Africa is going 
to lose England. England could afford to lose South Africa, 
but South Africa could not afford to lose England and all that 
England means to us. (Opposition cheers.) These people are 
not sentimental people, but they have one sentiment to the 
&ji&$ 
-X-xs}-* 
extreme, and that is the sentiment of freedom. (Loud Opposition 
cheers.) We are going to" fight against the thing, which is the 
most difficult in the world to fight . . . against sentiment. England 
is going to take a wolf by the ears, and as sure as she does 
that she is going to lose South Africa. 
"Believe there is a bright future for the Transvaal and 
the Free State if we adopted the principle of the protected 
State, which is, I think, what Mr. Sauer means, and which 
is stated in detail by Mr. Schreiner. (Opposition cheers.) 
That would give the Republics individual national existence, 
which is all they want, and it would be of enormous advantage 
to South Africa and the Empire. It is no advantage to us 
to swamp out these little civilisations ; it is all the better to have 
such civilisations, perhaps to show us things we can copy with 
advantage. Annexation will turn the energies of these people 
away from peaceful pursuits to preparation for the next revolt, 
and whenever England is in a tight place — mark my words, 
sir — these people will get ready and will fly at her throat. (Opposition 
cheers.) 
"Is that u wise policy? Is that a policy which any man who 
loves his Mother Country would support? If annexation is applied, 
I can only say that the people wiU regret this thing when we 
have passed away from the scene, and when it doesn't matter 
whether Sprigg or Merriman or any one else is sitting on these 
benches. It does matter a great deal whether in South Africa we 
are to progress along the lines of English civilisation, doing 
our work by subduing and civilising and helping the coloured 
races of this country, or whether we are to be torn with racial 
discord, torn with revolt, with more burnings of homes, more 
murders, and the whole miserable story of Ireland repeated." 
(Opposition cheers). 
* * 
Bnt even if yon were the race appointed by Providence 
to govern all the goldfields of the world, yon might be 
satisfied with them .... yon might consider the rights 
of other nationalities on their land and their farms and 
refnse to lay thousands of happy homes desolate from 
North to South, and from East to West. 
What is the crime for which this little nation of a few 
thousands men and women must be exterminated under 
such frightful tortures? 
Their only crime is simply love of independence and 
ardent patriotism this crime Lord Eoberts and the 
goverment try to punish by the annihilation of the wole 
people. 
You dare not answer me again when I repeat my 
question : , 
Why all these cruelties? 
For the terrible answer is that your politicians have 
driven honourable geaerals to systematic barbarity by 
the refusal to recognise either the Free State or the 
Transvaal Government as responsible authorities, with 
whom they can negotiate. Your Goverment has decided 
not so much to annex or incorporate the Poer States 
as to treat hem as a sort of no-man's land, dealing only 
with individual Boers, while punishing them as rebels 
and traitors. 
Your Government had to decide between two solutions — 
limited independence and absolute despotism . . . and with 
a curse it choose the latter! 
Mr. H. W. Massingham, who during this war has been 
an honour to journalism by strength of character, moral 
courage and enthusiastic disinterestedness, wrote in the 
Morning Leader of 5 November: 
"From wat cause do these horrors proceed? From the fact 
that we are making war not upon Governments but upon a people. 
The Governments of the Boer States have been crushed out. 
The warfare continues. No terms are offered to the military 
leaders of the people, any more than they were offered to their 
duly constituted civil representatives. 
"It is for this reason that we are engaged in the dreadful work 
of tearing up a community by its roots; of harrying women and 
children to their death or their ruin ; of deporting a whole 
population to foreign lands; of burning their houses and crops; 
of making groups of women prisoners, conveying them hundreds 
of miles from their homes, and leaving them (as in one case that 
has been brought to my knowledge) penniless and shelterless in 
strange English towns, 
''Without one shadow of reason — for the resistance to our 
arms is as keen as ever, and as ably and thoroughly organised — 
we have worked a millitary hocus pocus, by which, in a phrase, 
we have changed enemies into rebels, an unconquered foreign 
country into a British colony. Why have we done this? In order 
to justify the appalling barbarity of oar military methods." 
"Why do not the Boers make peace, now that they 
are beaten?" kindhearted Englishmen have asked me, 
\ 
refusing to listen to the answer the Manchester Guardian 
had given already : "because it is for the conqueror, not 
the conquered, to make peace, and that in this case the 
conqueror has repeatedly refused to offer any terms 
whatever." 
Unconditional surrender is not a condition of peace 
that has ever been accepted by any community of white 
men in modern times. 
England could, by only lifting its finger, obtain everything 
it went to war for, and more besides, and so 
could have saved thousands of lives, but you prefer, as 
Mr. Charles Williams said in his noble indignation, to 
rival the archievements of Attila, leaving a country 
"Where peace 
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes" 
* * 
* 
Making a desolation and calling it peace, actually 
boasting ot atrocities, that you would not have dared to 
attempt in Europe, brings down upon the doers the curse 
of all civilised people. 
The war goes on because your remorseless cruelty 
gives the patriots of the Republics the most powerful 
motives for continuing the struggle. 
It is because your severity has overreached itself. 
Your organisers of defeat, your Chamberlains and Milners, 
refused to terminate the war by convincing the 
Boers that defeat is not going to rob them of everything. 
These Shylocks want the last ounce of flesh! They 
demand such an absolute surrender from a whole nation 
as has not been asked since the partition of Poland. 
They force a whole people of freeborn Christians to 
ehoose between surrender or the prison. If they surrender 
voluntarily you deport them. If they go on fighting you 
burn their farms and turn their women and children 
adrift into the winter . . . you confiscate their land and 
yon expel the foreigners, on whose behalf you took up 
arms! 
Your cruel methods can produce no settlement! 
You can repeat the mean platitudes of the Daily News 
about the reconciliation, which is to be effected as soon 
/* 
XiS^X^b A^^i&M 
as the victory is completed, till you get disgusted yourselves 
by the nauseous sentimentality, but you can not 
truly believe them. 
It is a mere question of force, the right, as Swift explained 
of the grenadier to take the property of a naked 
man ! 
* * 
* 
The cause of this protracted war and all this cruelty 
is the annexation, by which you tear every shred of 
independence from the country "denuded" by your troops. 
You entered on this war with the plea that it was 
undertaken for "equal rights", and you are now depriving 
all men in the Transvaal and Free State of their 
'rights, devastating the country with fire and sword, driving 
defenceless women and children from their ruined 
homes. 
This annexation is the final acknowledgment and coronation 
ot the policy first attenipted by Mr. Rhodes and 
Dr. Jameson five years ago and continued by Mr. Chamberlain 
and Sir Alfred Milner. 
Mr. Cecil Rhodes said: 
u Three years ago I made a Raid, and everybody said I was 
wrong; now the Queen s Government are preparing another 
Raid, and everybody says, they ate righf . 
So the annexation and destruction of the Republics is 
a compliment to him... and a distinct step backward in 
civilised usage. This is acknowledged by the Manchester 
Guardian in these severe and solemn words: 
"It is many years since any civilised State has claimed the 
right utterly to annihilate another. Cession of territory has indeed 
been demanded, but the main recent cases in which it has been 
enforced against the will of the inhabitants have not been encouraging. 
The Americans have not found the process of "liberating" 
the Filippinos a happy one. The annexation of Alsace-Lorraine 
has done more than anything else to turn Europe into an armed 
camp. Tnstead of giving Germany security, it has forced her into 
militarism and kept her in permanent dread of France for nearly 
thirty years. But these partial cessions of territory are a very 
different thing from the entire destruction of a nation. They 
have at least the semblance of legality, for they are performed 
* 
by a responsible Government, and that the Government to which 
the ceded territory owed aUegiance. The annexation of the Free 
State and the Transvaal have and can have no such legal basis. 
Oar Government merely annonce their intention of annexing. 
That is to say, they claim the right to kill or make prisoners 
all the male inhabitants of the Transvaal, who refuse to accept a 
Government, imposed on them by sheer force, and to punish 
acts of "rebellion" by burning farms in the district where an 
ontbreak occurs. There could be no more naked denial of right 
as between nations. And this denial of national rights means 
inevitably the infliction of suffering on individual men and women 
in proportion as they are good patriots. It means a dreary future 
of confiscations, hangings, and burning of farms. It is no doubt 
true that no Englishman wishes or intends these consequences. But 
they follow on the policy of crushing a free and brave people as 
night follows day. A military Government perforce weeds out the 
best men among the people that it governs. It drives them into exUe 
or it kills them. It makes some of the best feelings of men criminal, 
and it encourages most those who are most servile. This is the 
kind of government to which this country, forgetful of its sympathy 
with enslaved Greece and Italy, has doomed the Boers of the 
Republics. Such is the outcome of the campaign for liberty and 
and equality in South Africa." 
How these words of the Manchester Guardian, spoken 
two months ago, are already proven to be true! 
The women of South- Africa saw the danger. At a large 
meeting in Capetown, attended by 1500 women the following 
resolutions were unanimously passed: 
Fiist Resolution. 
Proposed by Mrs. W. F. Purcell, seconded by Olive Schreiner: 
"This meeting records its solemn protest against the anexation 
of the Republics and against the spirit of revenge shown in 
carrying oat that policy, which wiU outrage the principles of 
morality and strike a deadly blow to the best interests of South 
Africa and England." 
Second Resolution. 
Proposed by Mrs. A. F. Steytler, seconded by Mrs. Roos, and 
supported by Miss Molteno: 
"This meeting of South African mothers and daughters strongly 
condemns the unjustifiable intervention of the present British 
Government in the internal affairs of the Transvaal, which has 
resulted in the cruel and unrighteous war now being waged in 
South Africa." 
They saw the consequence of England's violating the 
laws of justice and liberty by a policy of annexation, 
which was popular because it required no thought, because 
it satisfied feelings of revenge, and because it adds to 
what passes in these your days of degeneration for 
national glory ! But oppression is of the same dirty khaki 
hue the whole world over! 
* * 
* 
Can this oppression remain popular when the sons of 
Britsh mothers see by what means this annexation is 
forced on two free nations? 
It the new Imperialists of England want to search history 
for precedent, anxious to find a law of conquest . . . they 
will find that this so called law, is a denial of all law 
and apt to overturn the liberty of their own country. 
Even Ireland was not annexed without treaty or pact 
or charter. 
No, England can get no title for possession resting on 
law ... no title by the law of covenant ... no title even 
by the law of usage. 
What Spinoza said ot laws is equally true of settlements 
after a war: "Those are strong which appeal to reason, 
but impregnable are those, which appeal to the assent 
as well of reason as of the common affections of mankind". 
Mr. Chamberlain, subverting the fundamental laws of 
England and the free colonies, introduces an arbitary 
and tyrannical government to convince the Boers that 
they ought to have treated aliens at once as citizens! 
What he does has no place in jurisprudence .... he 
sets a stamp and character of servitude on freeborn 
Christian men of old and noble European race, who have 
fought to the last for their independence. 
If England's colonies had the perspicacity to understand 
the meaning of his highhanded acts against the selfgovernment 
of one of the colonies, be should be impeached 
as Strafford was. 
But they will wait till the Empire is a wreck, wrecked 
by militarism and that most deplorable of all arbitrary 
governments: tyranny by a deluded democracy! 
But violation is no legislation and robbery unpunished 
does not repeal the decalogue. 
The sword of Divine Justice seems slow, and we have 
too often seen "captive good attending captain ill" to 
believe in God so immediately interfering in events as 
would satisfy our impatience of injustice. 
4 But surely the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, and 
history teaches, as Eussell Lowell so tersely says, "that 
wrong can reckon on no alliance with the diviner part 
of man, while every high exemple of virtue, though it 
let to the stake or the scaffold, becomes a part of the 
reserved force of humanity, and trom generation to generation 
summons kindred natures to the standard of righteousness 
as with the sound of a trumpet . . . ." 
It is the fatal necessity of all wrong to revenge itself 
upon those who are guilty of it or even accessory to it. 
Your victory renders you helpless to promote good or 
prevent evil. The oppressor is dragged down by the 
victim of his tyrany. The eternal justice makes the 
balance even. 
' While the men and women of Dutch descent in the 
whole of South- Africa will be lifted above their physical 
abasement by spiritual compensations, by the memory of 
a, heroic struggle and the hope, that the day is near 
when the Lord's sword will smite you, your new goldmines 
will be counterpoised by moral impoverishment 
and the enemity of the whole world leagued together. 
Are you blind in England? 
You have no longer any army to be employed in aggressive 
Imperialism ... in China you have learnt how 
your craving for expansion has diminished your power . . . 
no retrenchment is possible to you for a long time as it 
will require many years and many millions before you 
have put even your defence in tolerable order ... and 
the little time left to you, you waste in murdering a 
small free people, teaching Cossacks how to behave when 
whip in hand they race through English villages. 
The smouldering war you call peace will flame up 
when the wind that threatens you gets up from the North. 
*** 
"v.- 
', %.- j^&sStf i> =-*^«k^~v-- ; * ivii^i Tsxjfe 
Do not threaten and boast so loudly, oh leaders of the 
British Imperialists! 
Prudent guides enjoin silence in the regions of avalanches... 
the vibration of your shouting and Mafficking 
may dislodge what threatens you from the dark mountain 
of the North. 
But it is true your cruelty has gained you one admirer, 
sultan Abdul Hamid, who is strengthened in evildoing 
by your following his exemple, and ot whom by your 
own acts you have now become the forced accomplice 
in Armenia. But you have estranged from you for ever 
all the small nations of Europe . . . you have done intolerable 
wrong to the Hollanders and the Flemish, who 
look with horror at you across the North Sea. 
Blind to the lessons of all experience you make a 
New Ireland in Africa, and you have made it impossible 
for England ever to interfere, when it sees a nation 
being murdered by a strong neighbour . . . even the 
stones would turn against you for such hypocrisy ! You 
have prevented yourselves healing the wounds of the 
war for who can heal an amputated limb? The stump 
will ache with every change of the political weather. . . 
the time of your danger will be the time of the Lord. 
The race-feud which Sir Alfred Milner has kindled in 
South- Africa will threaten your Empire the men and 
women of Dutch descent in South Africa, growing up in 
rooted animosity and endless sorrow, will be braced up 
to the deed of their own deliverance by memories of 
your endless cruelties it will create a pride to leel 
the indignity of bondage. . . . without selfgovernment, 
dragooned by your soldiers, sullenly submitting for a 
time to a destiny which they loathe, they will be as 
lead to your feet, a burden and a disgrace. . . . they will 
remain morally ungovernable by the intolerable recollection 
of hopeless wrong death, sin, cruelty will 
stalk amongst you and will make two races glare into each 
other's eyes . . . you never will be able to unite these 
men with yourselves in a common feeling in a common 
cause they will not tremble before their oppressors, 
who, scourged by the moral indignation of public opinion 
and history, inevitably will get more and more cruel 
the heroes and the sons of the heroes will accomplish 
* 
i 
MX^'^X/X 
% 
at last their own redemption, "going forth as it were with 
nothing but a stone and a sling and what oppression 
could not take away!" And it you desire to know by 
what authority they will act, I answer with Henry 
Grattan, that their right is the right every man has to 
defend his property against a robber, his life against 
a murderer, his country against an invader, whether coning 
with civil on military force — a foreign army or a foreign 
legislature. 
* * 
If it be the worst of crimes to injure a human conscience, 
who can hold guiltless the statesmen, who now 
sin against Milton's England by brutalising a free people 
and leading weak consciences to call right what is wrong? 
When the other day I was in England I found a city 
full of men with their faces turned backwards to a past 
of unrighteousness and violence instead of forward to the 
future the Peace Conference promised. 
This war has demoralised the majority of your nation, 
forcing ten thousands of them to a fatal compromise with 
their hereditary principles of right, fair play and justice. 
But all these Boers and British soldiers, maimed and 
killed quite needlessly, will force themselves into your 
conscience and sit at Christmas by your hearth stones. 
You are praised by the Sultan but condemned by religion 
and poetry ! Poetry is at the side of the heroes of 
the republics! What man, touched by God's sacred fire, 
ean be exulting and triumphant over your conduct in 
the war ? . . . who can celebrate the chivalrous act of a 
glacier crushing a hamlet built round a church on the 
sunny slope of an Alp? 
The -'absent minded Beggar" is the right sort of hymn 
for your predatory war, but the poets of your New 
Ireland will deepen the national consciousness and intensify 
the popular emotion, they will set the chords vibrating 
to wrathful resolve in South-Africa from sea to sea. 
Singing poets and sobbing methers will dare your 
mallet of brute force on the desolate veld amidst the 
burned homesteads. 
* 
Why do you not stop the war which disgraces you? 
Will there be no striking of a truce of God? 
Is England so absorbed and angry with the performing 
cf the meanest task a great people ever undertook, that 
it does not unite in condemning with one voice the present 
conduct of the war? 
Can you not come back to the honest every-day logic 
of John Bright ? to the goodhumoured sagacity of 
the John Bull, we liked and respected in former years, 
by calling upon the Government to bring it to and end 
first by negotiations with the military leaders, and then 
by the promise of full powers of self-government accompanied 
by a complete amnesty, and by the restoration 
of those bonds of family life in the Transvaal and the 
Orange Free State which have been wickedly and lawlessly 
broken? 
Oh! what is wanted in England is a prophet as the 
prophets of old, who with exalted conceptions of God 
and the national vocation, corrects the aspirations of the 
community and holds a iotty ideal up to the people. 
He wilf appeal to that high type of Englishmen, I revere, 
to earnest men and women, who obey the dictates ot 
conscience, because right is right, and who, examining 
the worth of the opinions they currently receive from 
their newspaper, will appeal from the newspapers to the 
conscience and ask revision of the verdict by which a 
free nation is condemned to death. 
For that nation is not yet dead. We do not give up 
the country of the Hollanders in Africa. We see her in 
a swoon, but with Ireland's noble orator I say: "she is 
not dead . . . though in her tomb she lies helpless and 
motionless, still there is on her lips a spirit of life, and 
on her cheek a glow of beauty ... 
"Thou art not conquered; beauty's ensign yet 
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, 
And death's pale flag is not advanced there." 
May it please Almighty God to interpose His mercy 
between the stroke of death and the liberty of a Christian 
nation ! 
England's awakening will be the history of a conscience. 
Amsterdam, 
4 November 1900. 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN. 
N * 
X? 
\ 
XX : Jx ,,-X -,- • * . "* "" "X-'*"*"_'.-'" 
' " r - ? 5f 
tX * _.X< -• x*t i. .' - i - *$»-" 
* - • -"- *■ " -~' r " ' > * * ■ v - »-' ■ X -, 
% S ~~ " * J - ' \ *.*• 
-&- -**»- - **• <* >* or ■» 
"*-*.*"- ,w-x : * , " - * \ v 
*. -» - v -« *,«* - -St,* 
-C - ' "* 3~ "*. * X * - % * * 
-X *" " j$ _ " j. » "^ *-*"*-*■« r ' 
"* i=1 r -X. •* * ■** * _ *■* /T 
> -^ -X^^r . - ,* 5-* . j% _ 
* '- v *>*— -/: > *sT, , » *•■ t -,» - \ f *. v x^ 
Tins is a reprint of the article published in the „Handelsblad" 
of 11 November 1900. 
In January of this year was published: 
Open letter to the Duke of Devonshire 
FROM 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN 
Editor of „Het Algemeen Handelsblao"! 
and in June 
The Struggle of the Dutch Republics. 
(Open letter to an American Lady) 
BY 
CHARLES BOISSEVAIN 
Editor of „Het Algemeen Handelsblad". 
Both are reprints of articles published in English in 
the „Handelsblad". 
/ 
They can be ordered through any Bookseller, or obtainedj from 
the Publisher, Algemeen Handelsblad Office, N. Z. Voorburgwal, 
Amsterdam. 
Printed by Roeloffzen-Hubner en van Santen Lim. 
Amsterdam (Holland). 
r 