26 1
25 1
25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -1-
B-8

(Now, what I would like to discuss with you is a typical day
when you were last back in the Soviet Union. When was the
last time you were back there?)
A typical day for example, in what year?
(Wel what was the last year you were there?) It was 46.
(46, was it summer?) 46.
(That was after the war.) Yes.
(Well, now what I would like you to do is to take a typical
wo ing day and start out then you get up in the morning.)
To make it better I describe a typical working day in the
academy.
(You say typical working day in the academy. Were you in the
academy in that year, in that summer?) Not this summer. No,
but in 45, before I left.
(I think more interesting is 46, because 46 was after the war.)
You see, it will be not a typical day, because every day was a
different.
(And what were you doing?) I was on leave in Moscow, and really,
I don't remember what I was doing, because every day I had done
something else.
(Okay, that's fine.) Or my work here?
(a, I think probably a day in 45 would be better then.) Then
I can describe this?
(Yes, sure. Now, just start out when you get up in the morning,
and just describe) You know, I got up at 8 in
the morning. I washed myself, and then at 8 I was in the25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -2-

academy.
(You said you got up at 8?) Yes, at half past 8 I was in the
academy. There we had to line up.
(Maybe, I can slow you up here a little bit, because you said
you got up and got washed; were you living alone?) Yes, I
had my apartment in the city. (Hm, hm) Most of us lived in the
academy, but some of us had the means to live private.
(Aha. You didn't eat in the apartment?) No (Hm hm). We have
eaten in the academy,
(Aha, certainly.) After lining up we had our breakfast.
(Hm hm) And at 9 o'clock our lessons started.
(Well, can you tell me what breakfast was like?) Usually
it was coffee or cocoa.
(Then I would like to know where you ate, with whom, and
what it was like. Give me as good a subjective description
as you can.)
(In Russian) We ordinarily ate by class and by group.
(That means ordinarilybyolass and by group?) Yes. But because
I was in the last course (class) and there were only 10 persons
altogether we were permitted to eat everyone by himself. Without
lines, without standing in this line.
(I see. Then whom did you usually eat with?) And usually we
got together three or four persons from our course. We had
tables for 4 persons, each every table. And then we got our
breakfast. Either it was coffee or cocoa and then some porridge,
usually without meat. At breakfast we had no meat. And then
at 9 /Blank/
(Okay, then they served the food) Who?25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -3-

(Did they serve you the food?) Because we could eat without
groups we needed only 10 or 15 minutes for our breakfast. At
9 o'clock we had finished our breakfast and went to our lessons.
Lessons started at 9 o'clock.
(You would be sitting then with your friend at the table, or at
this table, wouldn't you?) Hm, hm.
(And would you ordinarily be talking or would you just be
eating?) No, because you see, we had just a little time, and
we had no time for talking. The last course you see, we tried
to live as short at this academy as possible. We came possibly
late and made our duty quickly and get to leave off. Therefore
we didn't lose time there for time.
(You didn't have much to do with your friend there?) Yes.
Because you see the fourth course, it was in some way independent,
and it was only our duty, but we weren't interested in
this academy as some institution, you see. We had not so many
friends there.
(Okay, then you will go right from the breakfast to the course.
Would you usually walk with a friend or would you go...) Yes,
with one or two friends we went to our rooms. We had our plans..
(You mean study plan?) Then we went in our room and the lesson
started.
(What was the first course, ordinarily?) It was different. We
had lessons from 9 till 3 or to 4 p.m.
(Well, supposing what might be your first course, for example?)
First lesson or first course?
(First lessons, I'm sorry.) First lessons. We had History of25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -4-

Party then, history of the diplomacy and the diplomacy itself,
then armament of the German Army, then "postroienie", the
build up of the German Army /The structure of the German
Army/ then German Ustavy Army.(Ustav are regulations of statutes,
or rules?) Yes, regulations for every department of
the Army, Airforce, then the armed forces, and so on. Then
languages. Languages because I was in the German department
and languages were taken there, taught there very seriously.
For example there was history of language, then accents.
(You mean pronunciation?) Yes, pronunciation in different
parts of Germany and then military language, just different
military phrases. Because many of us they had to go as staff
officer, contaoting with German people and than interrogation
of prisoners of war. And then there were political subjects.
There were several of them, because they told history of the
Party and then political economy.
(Now we would start out with let's say the first class in the
day. You see what I would like to get is the best possible
picture I can of how it was to live in that situation. How...
Just what you did, how you felt about it, how other people
reacted to it. Now, one of your History of the Party might
have been your first course. Now, I'd like to know who was
teaching it, what kind of person he was, what it was like
when you walked into the room. I mean, Just exactly what
happened step by step. You opened the door, you walked into
25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -5-

the room, what for a room is it, what do you do, what do they do.)
/Russian/ Then we entered the room.......
(Then you came into the room?) Into the room, and then we are
waiting maybe for 2 or 3 minutes till the teacher comes. When
the teacher comes in, the head of our group is standing up and
commanding that we all stand up and than he reports to the teacher
that so and so many persons are present, and if somebody is ill
then he reports that such and such a person is ill and isn't
present,
(What sort of person was the head of the group?) It was ordered
somebody of our students. It was ordered by authorities of this
academy.
(What sort of person was he, was he just the head for the one
class or was he...) Only this class in question.
(What sort of people did they chose for this?) Nothing
especially, just somebody, everybody could be. But not everybody
liked to. You see, it gave useless troubles. For example,
if they ask me, please be the head of the class, I say, oh, I
have troubles without it enough. You see, and some of these
persons they like to play the part, and such a person they are
going in this position.
(What will he have to do in that position?) They have this book
where they record what persons are present every day, and what
lessons we have this day and then every teacher must sign off.
After every lesson the teacher must sign.25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -6-

(That's all he did?) Yes. I think you have in America the same.
(Yes we do, I thought maybe he was more important. I thought he
might have been...) No, no, it was one of the students. And
after that we had to have a staff officer, you see but not every
group, but every course, so maybe 5, 10, or 20 youth they have
1 supervisor, that is one staff officer, another student.
(Now, who was this teacher of this course in the History of
the Party?) I don't remember, it was a major or a It. colonel,
you see, I didn't pay much attention to this.
(Well, what sort of person is that, I don't know.) I don't
remember his name or first name, because I was just...
(No, I'd like to have a description of his character. Do
you recall anything about it at all?) That was a real Army
officer, because we had done there a lot of difference between
cadre officers and reserve officers.
(He was a cadre officer?) No, I was a reserve officer.
(He was a cadre officer?) He was a cadre officer. And in
the Army during the war, there was very much of these cadre
officers and more than the half of them were reserve officers
which came to the Army only during the war and all these reserve
officers they didn't like these cadre officers because they were
regarded as stupid persons and it was really because cadre Army
was stupid people and we reserve officers we don't like them.
We look at them so just from above down. After the war we put
off our grey coats and were engineers, or teachers or something
25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -7-

intellectual, just intellectuals, and these damned cadre
officers they will always be the same in these gray coats of
theirs.
(Could you tell more about them, we have that same sort of
thing in the States. Can you tell me what sort of people
they were, how they got there?..and so forth,.) What?
(The cadre officers) And you see, you can't say about hate,
but in some way there was existing in some way so contradictory,
contradiction, between these two parts of the Army,
cadre and reserve officer. And even in combat life it was
very obvious this difference between this cadre Army and reserve
Army and just other persons are the teacher. They were, you
see, civilian persons, but all in gray coats and we regarded
them as ourselves. They wore uniforms but they were civil
people before the war, all in private life.
(How did this fellow conduct the class?) He had nothing to
do with the class, you see. He gave all of his lessons for one
or two hours.
(I mean how did he conduct the lesson, we call that a class?)
Aha, urok /lesson/. First of all, the first part he told something
to the class, explained something about a[[illegible]]s subject and then
he questioned the persons about what he told just now or about the
former lesson, what he has given the last time.
( What sort of answers did he expect?) I must say these academy
teachers, they were, and particularly the teacher of political
25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -8-

subjects, they were very severe. The persons there, they don't
like these political lessons.
(The students you mean?) Yes, the students, they don't like it
and Just these ordre officers they were not polite, you see, that
is one point more of thin difference. All these cadre officers they
are very coarse, they are not polite, absolutely. They can
blame you. That is nothlng for them.
(They ball you out?) Yes, and they can report you to the chief.
They don't treat you as a person. They don't say: "Look why
couldn't you prepare this lesson, or why is it in such a way?"
They never conduct just you so personally, they always denounce
it to the chief. And then you have to answer, him.
(In other words they don't say anything in the class-room, but
they...) Sure, sure. They regard a student not as a human
being but Just as a number, as a number in the Army, as they
are used to regard a soldier. A soldier in the. Soviet Army
at present is nothing but a number.
(How does the student feel, were any of the students interested
in the History of the Party?) Not usually, as a rule they were
not, because it is the most boresome subject, because everybody
knows it is usually, for example, if we study language,
or we studied some history of diplomacy. The people are interested
and they know, it can be useful in their future life. But these
political subjects the people don't see that they can make any use
of this knowledge.
25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -9-

(But I was in a military...) That is an avoidable evil.
(I was in a military school in 1945 too, and I remember that
many of us, most of us weren't interested in subjects, but
there were a few people, I can remember who they were, who
were particularly interested. There was nobody in this group
who was particularly interested in the History of the Party?)
In America?
(No, in your group. I remember that in my group there were one
or two people who were interested in one of these crazy subjects.
Do you remember anybody in this group?) Sure, some persons,
they were, I say not interested, but they studied well. But
these persons were either ambitious or they were persons who
like orders. What they are ordered, they do it. And if there
are orders that you must study, then they do it.
(How many people were there in a class, do you remember roughly?)
In my class were about 10 persons. It changed. Perhaps at the
beginning of the year there were 12 or 13, and finished 9 or
10 perhaps.
(Do you remember which of these people were particularly interested
in the History of the Party, for example?) May be two or three
were interested.
(Can you tell me something about these people as individuals?)
There was nobody who was interested in a private way because he
was really interested, he himself, but they were 2 or 3 persons,
persons who studied very well. Indeed, if it was ordered that25s RB HARVARD UNIVERSITY REFUGEE INTERVIEW PROJECT -10-

they get a good mark, then they studied. They always gave
good answers to all these political questions and they have
known the subject but they weren't interested personally
in it, Just to get good marks, to make a career.
(How did you feel about this class?) This class was very
strong, because it was gathered from all parts of Russia.
(Okay, tell me that, you see, I made a mistake. When I say
class I am talking about lessons /urok/. But class is really
the group too. How did you feel about the class? What sort
of people were in it?) What do you mean?
(I mean what sort of people were in this class of yours,
these 10 people who finished?) They were persons, nearly
everybody was with a high education. Before getting to the
Army everybody finished some institute, some university. I
don't remember exactly, but they were persons who finished
maybe the agricultural institute. But nearly everybody finished
or studied already at a university, and then they got to the
Army and when they looked for candidates for this academy they
came to this academy, because they must know languages and
have an education, high education already. Because these persons
they didn't learn, they didn't study for all three of 4 years
at this academy. They were collected and put in the last course
at once, you see.
(They had not been through the early parts of the academy?)
No, because there was no time. At that time they looked for
