  PROSPECTUS OF THE fassar Jfeiuak dulkp, POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. rs'bs. NEW YORK. : PRINTED BY C. A . ALVORD, 15 VANDEWATER STREET. 1865.  PROSPECTUS OF THE VASSAR FEMALE COLLEGE , POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. H 'j ; _\/Li.lu-, IS'ljs. \/ i. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY C. A. ALVORD, 15 VANDEWATER STREET. 1865. iIIADUME SCHOOL Of EDUCATION TRUSTEES. MATTHEW VASSAR, Founder, Poughkeepsie. MATTHEW VASSAR, Jb., Tbeabttbeb, Poughkeepsie. Hon. WILLIAM KELLY, Chaikmax, . . . RMnebeeh. CYRUS SWAN, Secbetahy, Poughkeepsie. Hon. IRA HARRIS, Albany. Hon. JAMES HARPER, New York. MARTIN 15. ANDERSON, li.. d., Rochester. How. JOHN THOMPSON, Poughkeepsie Rev. EDWARD LATHROP, D. D., New York. Host. CHARLES W. SWIFT, Poughkeepsie Rev. E. L. MAGOON, d. t>., Albany. S. M. BUCKINGHAM Poughkeepsie Rev. lIEXRY WARD BEEOHER Brooklyn. NATHAN BISHOP, ix. d., New York, BENSON J. LOBSING, PougJikeep.ne Rev. E. G. ROBINSON, D. ])., Rochester. SAMUEL F. B. MORSE, li.. d., Poughkeepsie S. 8. CONSTANT, New York. JOHN GUY VASSAR, Poughkeepsie Rev. WILLIAM HAGUE, d. d., New York. Rev. RUFUS BABOOCK, d. d., Poughkeepsie JOHN IT. RAYMOND, 11. d., Poughkeepsie CORNELIUS DUBOIS, Poughkeepsie MORGAN L. SMITH, New York. Hon. GEORGE W. STERLING, Poughkeepsie Hon. GEORGE T. PIERCE, Ulster Count SMITH SHELDON, New York. JOSEPH C. DOUGHTY, Poughkeepsie A. L. ALLEN, Poughkeepsie PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE, JOHN 11. RAYMOND. LL. D. VASSAR FEMALE COLLEGE S PROSPECTUS The object of this Institution, as stated by its Founder, is " to accomplish for young women what our colleges are ac for young men." This, according to his own interpretation, refers solely to the character of the education it shall seek to impart, and is intended to enjoin, not a feeble imitation of the ordinary college curriculum, but a general coincidence in the elevation of its aims and the careful adjust of its arrangements thereto ; with a wise reference, at the same time, to all the peculiar and modifying circumstances of the case. In their endeavors to carry this idea of the Founder into effect, the Trustees will be guided by the following General Scheme of Education. 1.— PHYSICAL EDUCATION. This is placed first, not as first in intrinsic importance, but as fundamental to all the rest, and in order to indicate the purpose of the managers of this Institution to give it, not nominally but really, its true place in their plan. Good health is essential to the successful prosecution of study, and to the vigorous development of either the mental or moral powers ; and without it, whatever attainments are made, will be comparatively valueless as the means of a useful or happy life. In the education of women, this is a consideration of pecu importance : first, because ef the peculiar delicacy of their physical organization, rendering it specially liable to derange from neglect or misuse; and, secondly, because of the transcendent importance of woman's health to the highest domestic and national interests. In the education of Ameri women, as compared with that of Europeans, it is believed that the claims of the body have been too much forgotten, or too entirely subordinated to intellectual cultivation ; and the consequences are seen in a certain slenderness of development and over-delicacy of constitution, in our educated class, which have become almost national, and in a style of feminine beauty among us, which, however refined and spirituel, too often blooms but palely for a languid or a suffering life, if not for an early tomb. It is established, therefore, as a maxim in this College, that the health of its students is not to be sacrificed to any other object whatever ; and that, so far as the result is attainable by means within its power, its alumnso shall go forth physi well-developed, vigorous, and graceful women, with en views and wholesome habits as regards the use and care of their bodies. To carry out this purpose, the following means will be re on : — 1. Great care will be taken, in the sanitary regulation of the College, as respects, e. g., the choice and preparation of food, the warming and ventilation of rooms, the hours for rising and retiring, for meals, study, and recreation, the rules and regulations affecting personal regimen, &c, so as to prevent the causes of derangement, and the formation or fostering of injurious habits. 2. liegular instruction will be provided (in. the " Depart of Hygiene") in the Anatomy and Physiology of the Human System, and especially in the Laws of Health. This instruction is intended to be full and thorough, and will he amply illustrated by the appropriate charts and diagrams, human skeletons, and a female manikin. It will be given by a Lady-professor, who to other qualifications will add that of a regular medical education. The same officer will be charged with a general supervision of the health of the students ; being professionally competent to advise in respect to the ailments likely to prevail among young women, and having many opportunities also, by timely warning and judicious counsel, to forestall and prevent them. 3. A special "School of Physical Training" will also be created, and placed under the charge of a competent Lady In this Department, regular instruction will ulti be given, to such -as desire it, in the arts of Hiding, Flower-gardening, Swimming, Boating, Skating, and other physical accomplishments suitable for ladies to acquire, and promotive of bodily strength and grace. The Hiding-School will be organized as soon as suitable arrangements can be made, and will be supplied with properly trained saddle and all the necessary equipments. Recreations, particularly in the open air, will not only be encouraged, but regulated and taught, and, to a certain ex required of all the students ; and the proper facilities will be furnished to render them attractive and useful. For this purpose, in-doors, the spacious and cheerful corridors of the college edifice, and, without, the beautiful college park, will afford unusual advantages. The play-grounds are ample and secluded ; and the apparatus required for the Swedish Calisthenics (or Boston Light Gymnastics), and for such simple feminine sports as archery, croquet (or ladies' cricket), graces, shuttlecock, &c, will be supplied by the College. Every student will be required to provide herself with a light and easy-fitting dress, to be worn during these athletic exercises. It will be left optional with her, whether to wear it or not at other times. 4. Open-air study and instruction will be encouraged, within proper restrictions. Class excursions will be made, under responsible direction, in the study of botany, miner geology, mensuration and surveying, and in sketching from Nature ; and, in suitable weather, teachers will be allowed, whenever it can be done to advantage, to take any of their classes abroad in the College grounds for recitation or lecture. 2.— INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. The special function of a college is, to furnish the means of an advanced intellectual, or liberal, education. It receives students who have satisfactorily completed the rudiments of learning in more elementary schools. It provides for them a suitable home, competent instructors, and the requisite appa One of its most responsible duties is, to guide them in the selection and arrangement of their studies ; so that their time and strength may be wisely economized, and that, within a reasonable period, the grand object may be secured, viz., a symmetrical development and discipline of the whole mind, and a consequent preparedness alike for the great general duties of life and for the more ready and successful acquirement of any particular profession. For the other sex, all this has been done for centuries, and in the main satisfactorily ; the leading object of the present enterprise is, to bring like advantages within the reach of women. A majority of those who enter the College will, it is presumed, be young ladies who desire to place themselves, or are placed by their friends, under its direction for the purposes of this higher general culture. For the benefit of such, a REGULAR COURSE OF STUDY will be carefully arranged, of which the following are designed to be characteristics :—: — 1. It will not embrace the mere rudiments. The founda- 