  
PROSPECTUS 
OF THE 
fassar Jfeiuak dulkp, 
POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 
rs'bs. 
NEW YORK. : 
PRINTED BY C. A . ALVORD, 
15 VANDEWATER STREET. 
1865.  
PROSPECTUS 
OF THE 
VASSAR FEMALE COLLEGE , 
POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 
H 
'j 
; 
_/Li.lu-, IS'ljs. 
/ 
i. 
NEW YORK: 
PRINTED BY C. A. ALVORD, 
15 VANDEWATER STREET. 
1865. 
iIIADUME SCHOOL Of EDUCATION 
TRUSTEES. 
MATTHEW VASSAR, Founder, Poughkeepsie. 
MATTHEW VASSAR, Jb., Tbeabttbeb, Poughkeepsie. 
Hon. WILLIAM KELLY, Chaikmax, . . . RMnebeeh. 
CYRUS SWAN, Secbetahy, Poughkeepsie. 
Hon. IRA HARRIS, Albany. 
Hon. JAMES HARPER, New York. 
MARTIN 15. ANDERSON, li.. d., Rochester. 
How. JOHN THOMPSON, Poughkeepsie 
Rev. EDWARD LATHROP, D. D., New York. 
Host. CHARLES W. SWIFT, Poughkeepsie 
Rev. E. L. MAGOON, d. t>., Albany. 
S. M. BUCKINGHAM Poughkeepsie 
Rev. lIEXRY WARD BEEOHER Brooklyn. 
NATHAN BISHOP, ix. d., New York, 
BENSON J. LOBSING, PougJikeep.ne 
Rev. E. G. ROBINSON, D. ])., Rochester. 
SAMUEL F. B. MORSE, li.. d., Poughkeepsie 
S. 8. CONSTANT, New York. 
JOHN GUY VASSAR, Poughkeepsie 
Rev. WILLIAM HAGUE, d. d., New York. 
Rev. RUFUS BABOOCK, d. d., Poughkeepsie 
JOHN IT. RAYMOND, 11. d., Poughkeepsie 
CORNELIUS DUBOIS, Poughkeepsie 
MORGAN L. SMITH, New York. 
Hon. GEORGE W. STERLING, Poughkeepsie 
Hon. GEORGE T. PIERCE, Ulster Count 
SMITH SHELDON, New York. 
JOSEPH C. DOUGHTY, Poughkeepsie 
A. L. ALLEN, Poughkeepsie 
PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE, 
JOHN 11. RAYMOND. LL. D. 
VASSAR FEMALE COLLEGE 
S 
PROSPECTUS 
The object of this Institution, as stated by its Founder, is 
" to accomplish for young women what our colleges are ac 
for young men." This, according to his own 
interpretation, refers solely to the character of the education 
it shall seek to impart, and is intended to enjoin, not a feeble 
imitation of the ordinary college curriculum, but a general 
coincidence in the elevation of its aims and the careful adjust 
of its arrangements thereto ; with a wise reference, at the 
same time, to all the peculiar and modifying circumstances of 
the case. 
In their endeavors to carry this idea of the Founder into 
effect, the Trustees will be guided by the following 
General Scheme of Education. 
1.— PHYSICAL EDUCATION. 
This is placed first, not as first in intrinsic importance, but 
as fundamental to all the rest, and in order to indicate the 
purpose of the managers of this Institution to give it, not 
nominally but really, its true place in their plan. 
Good health is essential to the successful prosecution of 
study, and to the vigorous development of either the mental 
or moral powers ; and without it, whatever attainments are 
made, will be comparatively valueless as the means of a useful 
or happy life. 
In the education of women, this is a consideration of pecu 
importance : first, because ef the peculiar delicacy of their 
physical organization, rendering it specially liable to derange 
from neglect or misuse; and, secondly, because of the 
transcendent importance of woman's health to the highest 
domestic and national interests. In the education of Ameri 
women, as compared with that of Europeans, it is believed 
that the claims of the body have been too much forgotten, or 
too entirely subordinated to intellectual cultivation ; and the 
consequences are seen in a certain slenderness of development 
and over-delicacy of constitution, in our educated class, which 
have become almost national, and in a style of feminine beauty 
among us, which, however refined and spirituel, too often 
blooms but palely for a languid or a suffering life, if not for 
an early tomb. 
It is established, therefore, as a maxim in this College, that 
the health of its students is not to be sacrificed to any other 
object whatever ; and that, so far as the result is attainable 
by means within its power, its alumnso shall go forth physi 
well-developed, vigorous, and graceful women, with en 
views and wholesome habits as regards the use and 
care of their bodies. 
To carry out this purpose, the following means will be re 
on : — 
1. Great care will be taken, in the sanitary regulation of the 
College, as respects, e. g., the choice and preparation of food, 
the warming and ventilation of rooms, the hours for rising 
and retiring, for meals, study, and recreation, the rules and 
regulations affecting personal regimen, &c, so as to prevent 
the causes of derangement, and the formation or fostering of 
injurious habits. 
2. liegular instruction will be provided (in. the " Depart 
of Hygiene") in the Anatomy and Physiology of the 
Human System, and especially in the Laws of Health. This 
instruction is intended to be full and thorough, and will he 
amply illustrated by the appropriate charts and diagrams, 
human skeletons, and a female manikin. It will be given by 
a Lady-professor, who to other qualifications will add that of 
a regular medical education. 
The same officer will be charged with a general supervision 
of the health of the students ; being professionally competent 
to advise in respect to the ailments likely to prevail among 
young women, and having many opportunities also, by timely 
warning and judicious counsel, to forestall and prevent them. 
3. A special "School of Physical Training" will also be 
created, and placed under the charge of a competent Lady 
In this Department, regular instruction will ulti 
be given, to such -as desire it, in the arts of Hiding, 
Flower-gardening, Swimming, Boating, Skating, and other 
physical accomplishments suitable for ladies to acquire, and 
promotive of bodily strength and grace. The Hiding-School 
will be organized as soon as suitable arrangements can be 
made, and will be supplied with properly trained saddle 
and all the necessary equipments. 
Recreations, particularly in the open air, will not only be 
encouraged, but regulated and taught, and, to a certain ex 
required of all the students ; and the proper facilities 
will be furnished to render them attractive and useful. For 
this purpose, in-doors, the spacious and cheerful corridors of 
the college edifice, and, without, the beautiful college park, 
will afford unusual advantages. The play-grounds are ample 
and secluded ; and the apparatus required for the Swedish 
Calisthenics (or Boston Light Gymnastics), and for such simple 
feminine sports as archery, croquet (or ladies' cricket), graces, 
shuttlecock, &c, will be supplied by the College. 
Every student will be required to provide herself with a 
light and easy-fitting dress, to be worn during these athletic 
exercises. It will be left optional with her, whether to wear 
it or not at other times. 
4. Open-air study and instruction will be encouraged, 
within proper restrictions. Class excursions will be made, 
under responsible direction, in the study of botany, miner 
geology, mensuration and surveying, and in sketching 
from Nature ; and, in suitable weather, teachers will be 
allowed, whenever it can be done to advantage, to take any 
of their classes abroad in the College grounds for recitation or 
lecture. 
2.— INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION. 
The special function of a college is, to furnish the means of 
an advanced intellectual, or liberal, education. It receives 
students who have satisfactorily completed the rudiments of 
learning in more elementary schools. It provides for them a 
suitable home, competent instructors, and the requisite appa 
One of its most responsible duties is, to guide them in 
the selection and arrangement of their studies ; so that their 
time and strength may be wisely economized, and that, within 
a reasonable period, the grand object may be secured, viz., a 
symmetrical development and discipline of the whole mind, and 
a consequent preparedness alike for the great general duties 
of life and for the more ready and successful acquirement of any 
particular profession. For the other sex, all this has been 
done for centuries, and in the main satisfactorily ; the leading 
object of the present enterprise is, to bring like advantages 
within the reach of women. 
A majority of those who enter the College will, it is presumed, 
be young ladies who desire to place themselves, or are placed 
by their friends, under its direction for the purposes of this 
higher general culture. For the benefit of such, a 
REGULAR COURSE OF STUDY 
will be carefully arranged, of which the following are designed 
to be characteristics :—: — 
1. It will not embrace the mere rudiments. The founda- 
tion was designed for the improvement of woman's education 
in those advanced stages where unendowed institutions are in 
a measure compelled to slight it : in the earlier stages, where 
existing schools have equal advantages, the College will as 
little as possible be brought into competition with them. 
2. It will extend through four years, that being the popular 
measure of a college course, and necessary in order fully to 
secure the desired improvements. The question has been 
raised, whether young ladies will be found willing to spend 
this length of time in study, after reaching their sixteenth 
year. This involves the whole question whether there is a real 
demand for an education for women, that is worthy to be called 
liberal. The Trustees propose to submit that question to a 
fair trial. 
The years will be distinguished, in the order of their suc 
as First, Second, Third or Junior, and Fourth or 
Senior. 
3. In the selection of the studies and the extent to which 
they are severally carried, the aim will be to make it a course 
specially appropriate to woman. The ordinary college curri 
will furnish a general guide, the intellectual faculties 
of men and women being essentially similar, and dependent 
for growth on the same elements of knowledge and like pro 
of discipline. But there are also wide differences in the 
spheres respectively assigned the sexes in life, and correspond 
constitutional differences, both intellectual and moral. 
These will not be lost sight of in adjusting the proportions 
of time and labor allowed in the Regular Course to various 
branches of study, and determining the relative importance 
to be attached to different forms of intellectual discipline. 
4. Care will be taken that the Regular Course shall not com 
too much. In our young country, where zeal for 
improvement is not always tempered by experience to the 
limits of feasibility, the great danger is that of laying out a 
too ambitious scheme. The Course of Study projected for the 
majority of our existing Ladies' Seminaries, is a full collegiate 
course. It would be difficult to mention any important branch 
of liberal learning which their " Circulars" do not include ; 
and, in most of these institutions, the attempt is honestly made 
to carry out the plan. But to acquire all these branches with 
a degree of thoroughness which would make it clearly worth 
while for the tyro to touch them at all, requires a full colle 
period of study, with all the facilities and aids that a well 
institution can furnish. 
It is not the purpose of the Trustees of Vassar College ma 
to enlarge this common scheme, either by the addition 
of new studies or by a further extension of the old. They 
would rather make the course select than imposing, thorough 
than large ; embracing enough for all the purposes of disci 
and a generous intellectual equipment, but undertaking 
nothing more than can be really and effectually done. By a 
wise use, w T ithin these limits, of the ampler resources of time, 
apparatus, and teaching force which it has at command, it is 
believed the College will more certainly accomplish its g^eat 
aim — a true improvement in the higher education of woman. 
5. The studies required of all, in the Regular Course, will 
be those only which are of common and universal importance, 
especially for purposes of discipline. Of the rest, such as,,su§ : 
tain common relations to the culture of the mind will be made 
elective with respect to each other. In selecting among the 
latter, the individual cases of students will be considered. 
The special tastes and aptitudes of each, her objects or prob 
destination in life, and the wishes of her friends, will all 
be allowed due weight ; while the judgment of the President 
and Faculty must in all cases be controlling and decisive. 
6. It will be expected of all students entering the College, 
that they take the Regular Course, unless allowed, for satisfac 
reasons, to pursue a Special Course. 
SPECIAL COURSES. 
There are many reasons, however, why, in the existing state 
of female education, and to meet the actual wants of women in 
our country, the College organization should be made as pliable 
as possible, and capable of adapting itself to a great variety of 
wants, — and why, therefore, the claims of the Regular Course 
should not be as rigidly maintained as is usual in colleges for 
young men. Many students will desire, for good reasons 1 , to 
devote their whole attention to single branches, or to a limited 
number selected with some special reference; and some, no 
doubt, will be glad to prosecute favorite studies, or those related 
to their future occupations, beyond the point to which those 
studies are carried in the Regular Course. The advantages of 
the College will be made freely and fully available for such ; 
and every possible facility will be afforded them for the accom 
of their special objects. 
There are scattered through the community a large number 
of ladies who, perhaps years ago, completed their studies at 
school without having satisfied their thirst for knowledge and 
improvement, and who would hail with joy an opportunity of 
supplying, under favorable auspices and in the society of their 
equals in age, the deficiencies of their education — deficiencies, 
of which the lapse of time has made them increasingly impa 
or which perhaps they find to be impediments to their 
success in life. Such will be specially welcome to the College ; 
it has been organized, and will be administered, as much with 
reference to their wants as to those of any single class in the 
community. They will find in the President and Faculty 
sympathizing friends, and among their fellow-students simi 
situated, it is hoped, a large circle of congenial com 
In selecting from the diversified advantages of 
the College those most suited to their needs, they will be 
allowed a freedom of choice, due to their maturity of char 
and judgment. 
DEPARTMENTS* OF INSTRUCTION". 
The following may be regarded as exhibiting, in a general 
* This title is, on the whole, preferred to " Schools," which has been proposed 
as a substitute. The objection to the latter, apart from ita being perhaps a. need- 
way, the titles and probable contents of the several Collegiate 
Departments of Instruction. This scheme, however, must 
be regarded as tentative. The Board reserves its final deci 
on these points, as well as on the distribution of the 
studies though the four years of the course, until experience 
has more fully developed the actual wants of the community, 
and the whole subject has been maturely canvassed by the 
Faculty of Instruction. 
The italics indicate the studies required of all. The other 
studies of the Regular Course are elective ; for which " special" 
studies of equivalent amount may be substituted, at the dis 
of the President : — 
I— DEPARTMENT OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, RHETORIC, AND 
BELLES LETTRES. 
BEGULAB COURSE. 
English Grammar, Rhetoric, Belles Lettres. 
Exercises in Composition, Reading, and Criticism of the 
English Classics. 
SPECIAL STUDIES. 
History of the English Language and Literature. 
Anglo-Saxon Language. 
lI.— DEPARTMENT OF LANGUAGES. 
EEGULAE COUESE, 
Latin — £ivy, Virgil, Cicero, Horace j with Roman Anti 
and Mythology. 
less innovation, is, that it implies an independent organization of the Departments— 
a plan which cannot here be carried out consistently either with the claims of a 
necessary economy or the interests of a probable majority of the students. The 
College as a whole is one School; and its organic unity is not a mere matter of 
theory, but practically important to its efficient working as an instrument of 
liberal (as distinct from special or professional) education. 
For corresponding reasons, the name "Schools" is given to the extra-colkgiuts 
Departments, embraced in our plan. 
French (or German) enough to enable the students to read 
and write the language correctly. 
SPECIAL. 
Greek, Spanish, Italian ; German, French, and Latin, ad 
libitum.* 
History of the Classical and Modern Literatures. 
III— DEPARTMENT OP MATHEMATICS, NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, 
AND CHEMISTRY. 
BEGULAB COURSE. 
Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, Conic Sections. 
Natural Philosophy. Elements of Chemistry. 
SPECIAL. 
Descriptive Geometry, Analytical Geometry, Calculus. 
Applications of Chemistry, ad libitum,. 
IV.— DEPARTMENT OF ASTRONOMY. 
REGULAR COUKSK 
Elementary Astronomy. 
SPECIAL. 
Physical and Spherical Astronomy, ad libitum. 
V.— DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL HISTORY. 
EEGULAE COURSE. 
Botany, Zoology, Mineralogy, and Geology. 
Physical Geography. 
SPECIAL. 
Comparative Anatomy. Natural Theology. 
* This expression must, of course, always be taken with the qualifications 
above implied, viz., under the sanction of the President, and to the extent com 
with the general arrangements of the College. 
12 
VASSAB FEMALE COLLEGE. 
VI.— DEPARTMENT OP HYGIENE. 
REGULAR COURSE. 
Elements of Human Anatomy and Physiology. 
Laws of Health. 
SPECIAL. 
The same, ad libitum. 
VII.— DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY. 
REGULAR COURSE. 
Outline of Ancient, Mediveval, and Modern History. 
SPECIAL. 
Philosophy of History. Political Economy 
VIII.— DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY. 
REGULAR COURSE. 
Elements of Mental Philosophy. 
Theoretical and Practical Ethics. 
special. 
Psychology, Political Philosophy, Federal and State Consti 
Evidences of Christianity. 
IX.— DEPARTMENT OF ART. 
REGULAR COURSE. 
Elements of Vocal Music. Elements of Drawing. 
Each of the Departments will be placed under the direction 
of a responsible head, or Professor, who will be aided in the 
actual work of instruction by the requisite number of assist 

It will devolve on the Professor to arrange and superintend 
the details of his Department, to determine what methods of 
instruction shall be employed (whether by text-book, lectures, 
or both), to select the text-books used, to assign the work of 
his assistants, &c. ; subject always to the approval of the 
President. 
In the selection of Professors, the consideration of sex will 
not be decisive one way or the other ; the aim of the Board 
being, in every case, to find the person who, all things con 
promises to be most useful to the students. The 
assistant instructors will be Ladies. 
In addition to the above, which taken together constitute 
the College proper, there will be organized three 
EXTRA-COLLEGIATE DEPARTMENTS, 
under the following titles, viz. : 
(1.) School of Yocal and Instrumental Music; 
(2.) School of Design ; 
(3.) School of Physical Training. 
In these " Schools," a wide variety of the branches respec 
belonging to them will be taught, by accomplished 
instructors, to those who wish to make them the subject of 
special and advanced study. 
The organization of the Schools is in progress, and will be 
perfected before the opening of the College, in September. 
3.— MORAL AND RELIGIOUS EDUCATION. 
To this, all will agree in assigning the foremost place in 
intrinsic importance. It is the earnest desire of the Trustees 
that, by the blessing of God, it may always hold that place 
also in the practical influence of the College. 
Whatever is attempted for the religious improvement of the 
students must, of course, be subject to the paramount right of 
the parent, as the responsible moral and religious guardian of 
his child. It shall also be free from all suspicion of sectarian- 
ism — of being conducted (that is) in the interest of any partic 
religious sect But, while the Trustees make this pledge 
for themselves, and will require a strict observance of it by 
the officers of the College, they wish it to be distinctly under 
that it is their desire, and will be their aim, to make it 
eminently a" School of Christ"- — a place where His word and 
doctrine shall be taught in purity and power, and where His 
renewing and sanctifying Spirit shall continually dwell. To 
this end, they invite the earnest and united prayers of all His 
followers, of whatever name, and enjoin on the Officers of In 
a consecration of their united influence and earnest 
endeavors. 
For the moral and religious improvement of the students, 
reliance will be placed, not so much on formal courses of in 
as on influences pervading the whole interior life of 
the College : on the beauty of Christian example in the con 
and conversation of its officers and pious students ; on a 
devout and loving recognition, in a simple form of common 
worship, of the daily providence of God, and of our obliga 
to serve Him ; on a sympathetic and judicious super 
of the spiritual welfare of the students, and kind 
correction of their errors of spirit and life ; and on encourage 
given to discreet benevolent and religious activity 
among themselves. 
The President of the College will be charged with special 
responsibility in this most important department ; and the 
Lady-Principal will be intimately associated with him in that 
charge. She will be specially selected with reference to quali 
for its wise and skilful management ; while it is 
hoped that none of the Officers of Instruction in the College 
will be without the clearest evidences of vital and earnest 
piety, or unprepared to co-operate cordially in all measures 
for the spiritual benefit of the school. 
The principal organized means of moral and religious edu 
will be the following :—: — 
1. The President's instructions in Moral Philosophy and the 
Evidences of Christianity. 
2. Daily chapel service, morning and evening, conducted 
by the President, and comprising Scripture Reading, Singing, 
and Prayer. 
3. Attendance by every member of College on the Sabbath 
services of some Christian congregation. A simple service 
will be held in the College Chapel, on every Lord's Day, 
under direction of the President ; which all students will be 
expected to attend, except those whose parents prefer to make 
special and suitable arrangements for their worshipping regu 
with some congregation in the neighborhood. 
4. Bible-class instruction. This will be thoroughly organ 
under direction of the President and Lady-Principal, and 
with the co-operation of the teachers. It will extend through 
the entire course, and aim at giving every young lady a com 
knowledge of Holy Scripture, and bringing its 
truths into vital contact with her heart and life. 
5. Social meetings for prayer and religious conversation 
among the students, under proper direction ; and private per 
conversation, by the President, or Lady-Principal, with 
such as seek it for solution of difficulties and guidance in duty, 
and with such as need it for advice and admonition. 
Any parent who desires will be allowed to designate some 
Christian minister to act as the special religious adviser of his 
daughter. Those students who are church - communicants 
will be expected to observe the sacraments in the city, in con 
with churches of the denominations with which they 
are respectively identified. 
6. Voluntary associations, either for religious improvement, 
as e. g., Societies of Missionary Correspondence and Inquiry; 
or for benevolent action, as e. g., Sewing-Circles to aid various 
objects of charity. 
The design of these associations being to cultivate the free 
development of the higher moral nature, a wide scope will be 
given them, under proper regulations, in the choice of their 
objects and modes of action. Any number of the young ladies 
will be allowed to organize for any good object that enlists 
their sympathies, whether general or special, permanent or 
temporary ; to choose their own corporate name, to fix their 
own terms of membership, to make their own regulations, to 
work in their own way (by contributions of money, mate 
or labor), and to dissolve at pleasure ; always, of course, 
subject to the rules of the College and the approval of the 
Lady-Principal and President. 
4.-DOMESTIC EDUCATION. 
The household is, by common consent, woman's peculiar 
province. In the majority of cases, it is the only one in which 
she performs an independent and dominant part. The art of 
administering its various economies, therefore, is among th^ 
least dispensable of her acquisitions; nor can any one hope 
to be recognized as a thoroughly accomplished woman, who 
is not an accomplished housekeeper. 
But home is the proper school for this art — the only school, 
in which the housekeeper can be thoroughly trained and ac 
The young lady at school is not placed in the 
proper conditions for successful practice ; nor can any thing 
more than an approximation to those conditions be effected 
amidst the complex arrangements and crowded occupations 
of the college-life, all looking to a widely different object. 
The Trustees are satisfied that a full course in the arts of Do 
Economy cannot be successfully incorporated in a sys 
of liberal or college education, without a far larger demand 
on the time of the students than would be either practicable or 
wise. The result of experiments already made in this direc 
is not such as to encourage a repetition. 
On the other hand, it is not forgotten that the young lady 
who takes the college course is withdrawn from home for 
vears during the formative period of her life ; placed in an ar- 
tificial community ; surrounded by influences and engaged in 
pursuits which, however exalted and salutary in themselves, are 
foreign to those with which her future life must be most con 
In such circumstances, she is in danger of forming 
tastes and habits tending to unfit her for her allotted sphere, 
and to render its duties perhaps positively distasteful. What 
the College can do, consistently with its special work, it 
will do, to guard against such tendencies ; to maintain a just 
appreciation of the dignity of woman's home-sphere ; to foster 
a womanly interest in its affairs ; to teach a correct theory, at 
least, of the household and its management, and to give some 
practical training in such domestic duties as admit of illus 
in college-life. 
1. " Domestic Economy" will be taught theoretically, 
through text-book and lectures, by a competent instructress. 
2. Yisible illustrations of the principles under discussion will 
be furnished, to the utmost practicable extent, in the College 
kitchen, larder, dining-room, laundry, &c, with reference 
e. g., to the selection of meats, vegetables, and other articles 
of food; their preparation for the table; the arrangement of a 
pantry ; the setting and serving of a table ; carving ; care of 
silver and cutlery ; distribution of domestics' work ; washing, 
ironing, &c, &c. 
lg, VX^., 
3. Personal instruction will be given to every one who needs 
it, as to the care of her own clothing and her own room, with 
particular directions respecting the best treatment of carpet, 
bed, bureau, and other furniture ; and the laws of order, neat 
and taste, w T ill be systematically enforced on all. No 
servants' work will be exacted of the young ladies ; yet they 
should be taught to superintend the work of servants in their 
own apartments, and to do with their own hands there what 
a lady ought to know how to do. 
4. Regular hours for sewing will be allotted to all the 
students ; first, for the necessary repair of their wardrobes, and 
then for ornamental or benevolent objects, of their own selec 
In these sewing-groups, which will be placed under the 
2 
direction of competent teachers, opportunity will be afforded 
for many useful suggestions; and, to some extent, regular in 
may be given in Plain and Ornamental Needle- work. 
S.— SOCIAL EDUCATION. 
In society also, woman has a special place and mission, 
which should not be lost sight of in the composition or conduct 
of her educational course. It is hers to refine, illumine, purify, 
adorn — not, under any ordinary circumstances, to govern or 
contend. She should be as intelligent as man, as broad in the 
range of her information, as alert and facile (if less robust) in 
the use of her faculties, more delicate and pure in her tastes; 
her «noral aims should be equally definite, her moral tone 
equally high : but her methods should be all her own, always 
and only womanly. 
Oratory and debate (whether public or private) are not 
feminine accomplishments ; and there will be nothing in the 
College arrangements to encourage the practise of them. 
Conversation, reading, and the beautiful arts, are; so are 
letter-writing, and other forms of elegant composition : and 
these should be cultivated to the highest pitch compatible with 
the natural gifts of the student and consistent with her circum 
in life. Few young ladies have talents to shine in all 
these departments ; hardly any but may succeed in at least one. 
Each owes it to society, so far as opportunity is afforded her, 
to discover and improve the gift that is in her : a gift, by 
which she may conti'ibute much to the innocent happiness and 
refinement of those around her, and largely augment her in 
for good. The members of this College will be en 
and assisted so to do ; they will, at the same time, be 
taught to make a discriminating and economical use of the 
limited time which should be spared for such accomplishments. 
1. Reading and Kindred Arts. — The ability of reading 
aloud for the instruction and entertainment of others — of read- 
ing not alone intelligibly and with correctness, but with that 
elegance and expressive power which bring out the full force 
and beauty of the composition — has come to be widely appre 
as a most delightful and desirable, as it is an eminently 
feminine, accomplishment. Comparatively few possess it ; and 
the notion still widely prevails, that the talent of good reading 
is a mysterious gift of Nature, which the fortunate possessor 
exercises by instinct, without effort and hardly knowing how, 
and the lack of which no amount of general intelligence or 
faithful effort can supply. On the contrary, it is believed that 
no talent is more entirely amenable to education, or more 
certainly within the reach of any young lady possessing per 
organs and a good brain — provided, also, that she have 
a skilful instructor and the requisite zeal. This beautiful art 
will be made a speciality in the College, and, it is hoped, may 
be made to take the popular place now held by Oratorical 
Declamation in the colleges for young men. 
Closely related to Reading is the art of Poetical Recitation, 
which is a rarer, and more ofasj>ecialgift. "Where it is found, 
it will be allowed an opportunity and furnished the means of 
improvement, and at the same time will be taught the limits 
of its legitimate use, as an innocent domestic recreation and 
organ of aesthetic culture. 
Tableaux vivants and acted charades may also, under proper 
instruction, be made to conduce to far higher ends than those 
of mere amusement. If the subjects are well chosen, and 
carefully studied and represented, it is difficult to conceive of 
a finer praxis than they afford in the power of artistic compo 
in the study and delineation of character, in expression 
by look, attitude, and gesture, in the antiquities of costume, in 
the exact apprehension of historic scenes and personages. As 
forms of social recreation they will unquestionably continue 
to be employed; young ladies should be taught to execute 
them well, with historical fidelity, truth to Nature, and artistic 
skill. 
2. Conversation. — As this is one of the highest social ac 
so is it one of the most difficult to cultivate 
with success, particularly to impart to others. It is none the 
less incumbent on a College for women, to attempt its culti 
with the most sedulous care ; for it rmist ever be one 
of the chief instruments of woman's power for good. 
Care will be taken, in selecting the College officers, that the 
young ladies may have, in them, models that may be safely 
and profitably followed. They will be expected, as far as 
possible, to conduct every recitation so as to be a lesson in 
correct, sensible, and unaffected conversation. 
It will be made the special duty of the Lady-Principal, 
aided by the other teachers as they have opportunity, to see 
that the faults of the young ladies in this respect are kindly 
pointed out and corrected ; that they are guarded against the 
coarse or insipid frivolities of rustic and fashionable talk ; that 
they are taught a more excellent way — taught, first, to think 
for themselves on topics of current interest, and then to ex 
their convictions, modestly, but frankly and with earnest 
sincerity; taught to use their resources of knowledge, argu 
and wit, with judgment and good taste; to maintain 
their opinions (if controverted) in a lady-like manner, and to 
yield gracefully when discussion sharpens into debate, and 
temper is likely to lose more than truth to gain by its continu 

Social gatherings for the purpose of conversation will be 
made as frequent as possible ; and voluntary societies, or circles, 
will be encouraged for improvement in this and other womanly 
accomplishments, in place of the ordinary college " Debating 
Societies" — so appropriate and useful in a school for young men, 
so utterly incongruous and out of taste in one for young 
ladies. 
3. Music. — The rudiments of vocal music will be taught to 
all, in the Eegular Course ; and the practice of social singing, 
both sacred and secular, will be encouraged to the utmost 
possible extent — not as a scientific exercise, but as a natural 
enlivener of labor and minister of innocent social enjoy 

For advanced scientific instruction in Singing and the vari 
kinds of Instrumental Music, ample provision will be made 
in an independent Department, or School, outside of the regular 
college course, and at a separate charge. These elegant ac 
being fashionable, as well as fascinating to 
those who have a talent for them, there will probably be but 
little need to stimulate attention to them. But it may be neces 
in some cases, to correct a mistaken or to check an exces 
zeal. Young ladies will not be allowed, without remon 
to sacrifice higher interests to needless proficiency in 
branches purely ornamental ; while those, who, for want of 
natural talent, are not likely to realize any reasonable return 
for the expenditure, will be conscientiously dissuaded (perhaps 
positively prohibited) from wasting time, labor, and money, 
which might be turned to so much better account. 
4. Aets of Desigk. — Elementary instruction in Drawing 
will be included in the Eegular Course, as belonging to the 
complete equipment of a cultivated woman. In the School 
of Design, full courses will be given to such as desire them, 
at a separate charge, by accomplished teachers in various 
departments of Drawing and Painting. 
The History of Art, and the principles of intelligent Art 
will be carefully taught. In connection with the 
ordinary collegiate instruction in Theoretical the 
rich materials of the Art-Gallery will be used systematically 
for purposes of illustration. The progress of Architecture, 
Sculpture, Painting, Engraving, Decorative Art, &c, from 
the earliest to the present times; the different schools and 
phases through which each has passed ; its various materials, 
instruments, and methods, and the peculiar effects of each ; 
together with the criteria of a sound taste by which the results 
are to be tried and judged — will all be taught from actual 
specimens or reliable pictorial representations, under the eye 
of the learner. 
Practical lessons will also be given, by the proper officer, in 
the Arts of Decoration as applied to the common purposes of 
life ; as, for instance, to the laying out of a garden-plot or 
ornamental piece of ground, the planting of a parterre of 
flowers, the composition of colors in a lady's dress with refer 
to each other and the complexion of the wearer, the dis 
of jewelry and other personal ornaments, the embel 
of a home-interior by the judicious selection and 
arrangement of its furniture, carpets, curtains, paper-hangings, 
table-ware, pictures, statuettes, flower-vases, and other articles 
of bijouterie, &c, &c. — where so much bad taste is continu 
displayed '' without regard to expense," and where intel 
and good taste may be made as economical as they are 
admirable. Matters of this kind enter so largely into the 
daily business of every home, and are so generally committed 
to woman's direction, that she should not be left uninstructed 
in the principles of taste, discretion, or morality, that ought to 
regulate them. 
These will all form appropriate and interesting topics for 
sensible conversation and friendly discussion in the social 
circles. 
5. Composition. — The writing of letters, essays, narrative 
and descriptive pieces, verse, and other forms of elegant com 
will of course receive the liberal share of attention, 
commensurate with their educational importance and com 
in all good schools. 
Letter-writing especially, as that which is in most common 
request and peculiarly suited to womanly uses, will be most 
carefully taught and its constant practice encouraged. In 
addition to class-instruction, respecting those proprieties of 
form and felicities of manner, of which every lady should be 
mistress, a College Post-office will be established, through 
which actual correspondence may be maintained among the 
pupils and their teachers. This, with one or two College 
magazines for anonymous or other literary miscellanea, to 
be read at various social gatherings, can not fail, besides fur 
a field for exercise and stimulus to exertion, to add 
much to the variety and interest of the college-life. 
6. Soirees, Receptions, Entertainments, &c. — Evening 
receptions will occasionally be given by the President and 
resident Professors, at their own houses ; and in the College 
parlors, by the Lady-Principal, or by one class to another, 
under her direction. , 
More formal artistic entertainments — musical, rhetorical, 
picturesque, &c. — will take place in the College Chapel. On 
these occasions, cards of invitation may be sent to a limited 
number of the friends of the College and of its members ; but 
it will be the settled policy of the Institution, in every part of 
its administration, to shield its students from all needless and 
unbecoming publicity. 
6.— PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION. 
From the preceding survey of the field of general education, 
which is the proper province of the College, it must be obvious 
that, if it does that work well, it will have few unexpended 
resources for special professional training. What incidental 
aids of this kind it can aiford, however, will be cheerfully 
rendered. 
1. Teaching. — The excellent Normal Schools established in 
this and other States for the express purpose, furnish ample 
means of training in this art, to the extent at least required 
in the management of the Public Schools. To those who aim 
at something higher, or who for other reasons prefer to pursue 
their education here, the organization of the College itself 
and its daily routine — its course of study, apparatus and 
methods of instruction, and incentives to diligence ; its rules 
of order, and the spirit of its discipline ; the personal character 
and habits of its officers, and the style of their intercourse with 
the students — will furnish daily lessons, and, if pondered with 
intelligent attention, cannot fail to mature in them fixed prin 
and habits for their future professional guidance. 
As complemental to this, a course of lectures may be deliv 
at some suitable point in the general course, to young 
ladies expecting to teach, on the " Principles and Methods of 
School Education." 
2. Telegraphing. — -As soon as the necessary fixtures can be 
obtained and placed, an electro-magnetic telegraph will be in 
operation at the College for business purposes, and will at the 
same time furnish means of instruction in this peculiarly fem 
employment. 
3. Phonographic Reporting. — Phonography will be regtf 
taught, and all the students will be encouraged to 
acquire the art for college uses, if for no other. The lecture 
and chapel will afford daily opportunities for practice 
to those who desire, for professional purposes, to become 
adepts. 
4. Book-keeping. — The general principles of book-keeping, 
and some simple system of practice, will claim the attention 
of all the students, from its extreme utility in the keeping of 
personal accounts, and in the management of a household. 
If found practicable, the course will, in particular cases, be 
extended sufficiently far to insure a respectable introduction 
to the counting-room. 
Officers of Instruction and Government. 
To carry out the above scheme, the College will commence 
with the following corps of Officers and Assistants : — 
The President. 
In addition to the general administrative supervision of the 
College, this officer will, for the present, act as Professor of 
History and Philosophy. 
The Lady-Peincipal 
will have the more immediate personal supervision of the 
young ladies. She will receive them on their first entering 
the College, assign them their rooms and room-mates, and 
hold to them, throughout their course, the relation of a confi 
friend and adviser. She will have a special maternal 
charge of their moral and spiritual interests, and of their per 
manners. 
A Professor of the English Language and Belles Lettres. 
A Professor of Languages, Ancient and Modern. 
A Professor of Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Chem- 
istry. 
A Professor of Astronomy, and Superintendent of the Ob 

A Professor of Natural History. 
A Professor of Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene. 
This will be a lady, professionally qualified to act also as 
physician and general medical adviser in the College. 
A Professor of Physical Training. 
Professors of Music, and of the Arts of Design. 
For students who take the Regular Course only, there will 
be required but a single instructor in Vocal Music, and one 
in Drawing. Additional provision will be made for those 
who, in the Schools of Art, pursue these branches to greater 
extent. 
Each Professor will have the responsible direction of the 
Department intrusted to his care, and the aid of a sufficient 
number of accomplished Lady- Assistants. 
Of the above officers, four Professors (besides the President) 
have already received appointment ; and, in respect to others, 
negotiations are nearly matured. It would be premature, 
however, to announce any names at present. At the Annual 
Meeting of the Trustees, in June next, the organization of the 
Faculty will be made complete, and immediately given to the 
public. 
Apparatus. 
Library. — The College will open with a Library of about 
five thousand volumes, all purchased for its use, and consist 
largely of valuable works of reference. Its growth will 
be fostered hereafter by annual appropriations, to be expended 
for the benefit of the several Departments, under the general 
direci^on of their respective Professors. 
Akt-Galleey. — The College is in possession of a valuable 
collection of oil and water-color paintings, chromo-tints, en 
original drawings, &c, recently owned by Kev. Dr. 
Magoon, of Albany, and presented to the Institution by its 
Founder, as a supplemental gift, at a cost of $20,000. There 
are between four and five hundred paintings, and several 
thousands of the smaller works. It includes also a choice 
Art-library, numbering nine hundred elegantly-bound vol 
and embracing standard sesthetical and illustrated 
works in English and other languages. The whole collection 
is conveniently arranged in the beautiful Gallery of the Col- 
lege, and will furnish its members copious resources not only 
for refined enjoyment, but for a high assthetic culture. 
Other valuable works of art have also been added. 
Astronomical Observatory. — This was erected and 
equipped at an expense of about $15,000. It contains an 
Astronomical Clock and Chronograph, constructed and 
mounted by the Messrs. Bond, of Boston ; a powerful Equa 
Telescope, with an achromatic object-glass (diameter 
12i inches), mounted by the late Henry Fitz, of New York ; 
a Transit Circle, constructed and graduated by Mr. Wm, G-. 
Young, of Philadelphia ; and other apparatus, all of the most 
approved manufacture. 
These valuable instruments will be placed for use in the 
hands of an American lady-observer, who enjoys a well-earned 
celebrity at home and abroad for her scientific attainments 
and discoveries, and who will also act in the College as its 
Professor of Astronomy. 
Philosophical Apparatus, and Chemical Laboratory. — 
These will be of the most recent and approved construction, 
and complete for all the purposes of illustration in the depart 
to which they belong. 
Cabinets of Mineralogy and Geology. — This supe^p col 
was procured and arranged expressly for the College, 
by Professor 11. A. Ward, of the University of Rochester, at a 
cost of more than $10,000. It has received marked com 
from the most competent judges, especially for 
its scientific completeness and symmetry. Professors Dana and 
Hall, who were selected as the highest American authorities 
to inspect and pass upon the work, report that " the speci 
have been selected with great skill and discrimination, 
and illustrate well the sciences represented." With respect 
especially to the arrangement, and the manner of exhibition, 
they pronounce it " unsurpassed by any cabinet they are ac 
with, either in this country or in Europe." 
Museum of Zoology and Botany. — A miscellaneous col 
for curiosity or display is not proposed, but a com 
and well-proportioned educational cabinet, com 
characteristic, specimens (systematically arranged) of 
the several Classes, Orders, Families, &c, into which science 
has distributed the animal and vegetable worlds. Measures 
are on foot to secure for the College, at once, a select muse 
of this kind ; and, around this nucleus, it is expected that 
a collection of constantly increasing value will be built up, by 
periodical appropriations, under the experienced hand of the 
Professor of Natural History. 
Maps and Chaets. — An ample supply, and of the most re 
authority. 
Anatomical and Physiological Models, Manikin, and 
Skeleton. 
Electeo-magnetio Telegeaph. 
Foe the " School of Music." — An Organ (cost $2,000), a 
Grand Piano, and a full supply of Square Pianos and of the 
other instruments taught ; all of the very best workmanship, 
and, for the most part, constructed expressly for the College. 
For the " School of Design." — In addition to the treasures 
of the Art-Gallery, this School will be furnished with the 
requisite Easels, Stools, Tables, and other permanent imple 
and with a proper number of Casts and other models, 
for the common use of the School. Materials for personal 
consumption will be supplied by the students themselves. 
Foe the " School of Physical Teaining." — A Riding- 
School, with horses and equipments ; Dio Lewis's Calisthenic 
apparatus; articles for recreative games, &c, a liberal supply. 
The apparatus of this School will be increased as rapidly as its 
organization assumes a practical form. 
#> 
Domestic Arrangements. 
No pains have "been spared to make the domestic arrange 
as attractive and home-like as possible. The young 
ladies' apartments are arranged in groups, in each of which 
two, three, or four sleeping-rooms open into one study-parlor. 
They are all airy and cheerful, having on the one side a pleas 
outlook into the College park, and, on the other, opening 
into the spacious corridors, which extend on every floor the 
entire length of the building and its wings (nearly 800 feet), 
and afford ample opportunity for in-door exercise in inclement 
weather. The rooms will be neatly carpeted and furnished 
throughout, and kept in thorough order by the College House 
Some of the sleeping-rooms contain single, and 
others double beds, in order to accommodate the different 
tastes and circumstances of different sttidents. 
The entire edifice is provided with an effective system of 
heating (by steam) and ventilation, with gas manufactured on 
the grounds, with an abundance of pure, soft water, distributed 
through the building, and with bathing-rooms and all other 
needful conveniences. 
The culinary department is placed under the charge of an 
experienced caterer, and will be provided with good cooks and 
servants. The utmost care will be taken to secure for the 
College a nutritious, wholesome, varied, and thoroughly un 
ctdsine. The college farm, kitchen-garden, and 
orchards (more than one hundred acres in extent), will furnish 
an ample supply of fresh vegetables and fruits. 
The laundry is completely equipped with the most modern 
and effective appliances. 
The College Parlors are large and pleasant ; and access can 
be had by the young ladies, at any time, to the private apart 
of their teachers and the homes of the President and 
resident Professors, without passing from under their own roof. 
Rates of Board and Tuition. 
An impression has gained currency, that the advantages of 
the College were to be made, in large measure, free to all 
comers. It is believed, that, as there is nothing in the cir 
of the community to require such provision, so is 
there a better way of accomplishing the benevolent object 
contemplated in such suggestions. 
The just measure of the money value of an education is, 
what it costs to furnish it ; embracing the two items of current 
expenses and interest on the necessary permanent investments. 
This reckoned for one year, and divided by the whole number 
of students for which provision is made, gives the fair annual 
charge for each. No parent who has the pecuniary ability to 
pay this price should ask to pay less, simply because, by so 
doing, he asks that his daughter shall to that extent be educated 
by others. If, for the sake of great general interests, he con 
to pay less, it should be with the feeling that, to that 
extent at least, he is under a debt of honor and justice to the 
common cause of education. 
But to fix the price of education by this standard — par 
that of higher education, which is by far the most 
costly — would place it beyond the reach of a large part of the 
community, embracing those classes from which the best 
students usually come. Hence, it is one of the noblest ser 
that can be rendered to the cause of truth, civilization, 
and humanity, when a man of wealth consecrates a liberal 
sum to found and furnish an institution of learning, thus 
sharing with his less favored brethren the burden and the 
privilege of rearing a seed to serve God and bless mankind. 
In a community as wealthy as ours, and in times of such 
general prosperity, it would be neither necessary nor wise, 
even had the College the means of doing it, to make its advan 
free or contemptibly cheap. But the College has not the 
means of doing it. It lias been called to " build in troublous 
times." The expense of its material arrangements, conceived 
as they have been . on a most generous scale, has far out 
the original estimates, and, contrary to anticipation, has 
more than exhausted the Founder's munificent gift. The 
work, however, is completed ; and the College stands, a noble 
monument of enlightened liberality, and an instrument of 
untold power for good in the cause to which it is consecrated. 
It surely is a light thing that the cost of maintaining it in 
operation should be borne by those who enjoy its advantages. 
The rates have been fixed, therefore, on the following prin 
: — 
(1.) The use of the permanent investments is granted to all, 
as an absolute gratuity. As they amount, at this time, to full 
half a million, this privilege is equivalent to a gift of more 
than one hundred dollars yearly to each one of (say) three 
hundred students. 
(2.) The actual expense of maintaining the College proper, 
in both its educational and domestic departments, with a reason 
margin for repairs, necessary enlargements, and contin 
must be met by the receipts, for board and tuition, 
from the students pursuing its Regular and Special Courses. 
The whole expense will be distributed equally among all 
the students ; so that there will be but one, uniform, annual 
charge, covering the entire cost of board (including fuel, 
lights, and washing), and of tuition in all the studies of the 
College proper — no " Extras" whatever being admitted therein. 
The independent " Schools" of Music, Design, and Physical 
Training, stand on a different footing. The expensive orna 
accomplishments taught in those schools do not fall 
within the range of a collegiate education, and will be made 
a matter of separate charge to those who desire the additional 
instruction. 
The particular rates, as arranged for the first year, accord 
to the best estimate that could be made in advance, will 
be found on a subsequent page, under the head of " Expenses." 
(3.) As there is some difference of judgment with respect to 
the estimate on which the above rates are founded, the Board 
wish it understood that, should it prove too low, the rates may 
in future years be raised. If, on the other hand, it yield a 
surplus, they may be lowered ; and, meanwhile, every dollar 
will be devoted to enhancing the advantages of the College, 
and assisting meritorious students to defray their expenses. 
(4.) The College has at present no funds available for the 
purpose of gratuitous instruction. As soon as the Trustees can 
command the means, they will cheerfully appropriate them. 
But it will not be in the form of public free scholarships. 
Appropriations of this kind will be made privately, in the 
form of receipted term-bills, and carefully adjusted to the 
individual circumstances of the case. Nor will they be con 
as a dole of charity, either to the student or her parents, 
but as an honor earned (generally in the College) by her own 
exemplary conduct and superior scholarship, as an expression 
of approval and confidence, and in trust for the benefit of 
science and mankind. 
College Year. 
The question has been raised, whether it might not be ex 
in view of the well-known salubrity of this region 
during the warm season and of the unusually complete and 
attractive provisions proposed to be made for out-door instruc 
and exercise, to throw more of the College Vacation into 
the winter, and more of the Term-time into the summer 
months, than is common in the schools generally. Many in 
considerations have been urged in favor of the change. 
The Trustees, however, concur with the Founder in the con 
that it would not be wise to risk a premature departure 
from established usages in this respect. They have adhered 
therefore, for the present, to the usual arrangement, leaving 
the question of change to be determined by future develop 

The College year will, in general, begin about the middle of 
September, and close near the end of June. The Vacation 
"will immediately follow, embracing the months of July and 
August. A recess of two or three weeks "will occur at the 
usual Winter Holidays. ' 
During vacations and holidays, the College building will 
remain open for the accommodation of any who may desire to 
continue their residence, boarding in the Hall and pursuing 
studies privately. 
Admission of Students. 
The College will be opened "Wednesday, September 20th, 
1865 ; on which day the examination of applicants for admis 
will commence. Operations will begin in every depart 
as fast as the classes can be formed. 
To avoid confusion and loss of time, it is necessary to obtain 
in advance full lists of those who intend to apply for admission. 
It is requested, therefore, that applications be forwarded before 
the 15th day of next June. If sent by mail, they may be 
addressed " Yassar Female College, Poughkeepsie, ~Ne\v York." 
They should state the name, age, and post-office address of the 
applicant ; the address of her parent or guardian ; whether 
she desires to take the Regular or a Special Course ; if Regu 
for which of its classes she proposes to be examined ; if 
Special, what particular studies she wishes to take ; in either 
case, what preparatory studies she has pursued ; what extra 
branches (if any) are desired ; and any points of 
inquiry, on which information may be needed. 
More than a thousand letters have been received, on behalf 
of young ladies desiring to enter the College, besides numerous 
oral inquiries. It is possible, therefore, that there may be a 
larger number of applicants than can be accommodated. In 
that event, all whose applications are received by June 15th, 
1865, will be regarded as standing on the same ground as to 
date of application ; and, among these, precedence will be 
given to the more advanced (in age and attainments) over the 
less, and (other things being equal) to those who take the 
Regular Course over those who do not. 
An answer will be returned to each application, giving in 
as to the result, and all needful direction for further 
proceedings. 
No day-scholars will be received ; none for less than one 
college year ; and none under fifteen years of age. 
The following are the requisites for admission to the 
several classes of the College. The authors and text-books 
named are intended merely as a general guide, in estimating 
the amount of proficiency required for each. Full equiva 
will, in all cases, be accepted. 
REGULAR COURSE. 
1. Applicants for the First Year's Class will be examined 
in the following :■— 
English Grammar, Arithmetic, Geography, History of the 
United States ; 
Algebra, as far as Equations of the Second Degree ; 
Latin. Grammar (Accidence and Rules of Syntax), and an 
amount of reading equal to Andrews' Latin Reader and five 
books of Caesar ; 
French Grammar, and half of Fasquelle's French Reader, 
or an equivalent. 
The examinations in the ordinary English branches (including Spelling, 
Beading, and Writing), will bo full and strict; and a deficiency in them 
will be decisive against admission. In Algebra, Latin, or French, when 
there is a reasonable prospect of the deficiency's being -made up, a con 
admission may be allowed. 
2. Applicants for the Second Year's Class will be examined 
in the following additional studies : — 
Parker's Exercises in English. Composition ; 
Da vies' University Algebra and Legendre's Geometry ; 
Livy, three books; and Virgil's ./Eneid, six books; 
Fasquelle's French Grammar and Header, De Stael's L'AUe- 
magne, and Voltaire's Charles XII. ; 
Greek and Horn an History ; 
Elements of Physiology ; and Physical Geography. 
3. Applicants for the Junior Class will be further examined, 
as follows :—: — 
Rhetoric (Blair, Boyd, or Qnackenbos) ; 
Trigonometry and Conic Sections ; 
Cicero's Select Orations and De Senectute, Odes of Horace, 
Classical Antiquities and Mythology ; 
Letters of Madame de Sevigne, La Fontaine's Fables ; 
Natural Philosophy ; Mineralogy and Geology. 
Should any of the applicants be still further advanced, they will be 
classed accordingly. 
SPECIAL COUKSES. 
Students allowed to take a Special Course will be examined 
in those lines of study only, which are necessary to its suc 
prosecuti on. 
In no case, however, will the examination in the ordinary 
English studies, mentioned above, be dispensed with. 
Expenses. 
The uniform price of Board and Tuition, for all Collegiate 
Students, whether pursuing the Regular or a Special Course, 
will be $350 per annum, payable half-yearly in advance. 
There are no extra charges for fuel, lights, or washing, for 
use of apparatus, or for any kind of instruction in the College. 
The books, stationery, and drawing-materials used in the 
College, will be furnished at the usual tradesmen's prices. 
EXTRA-COLLEGIATE DEPARTMENTS. 
The additional charge for Collegiate Students in these De 
will be at the following rates :—: — 
SCHOOL OF MUSIC. 
Singing, Piano, or Guitar 
$50.00 per annum. 
Organ 60.00 " 
Harp 80.00 " " 
ISTo charge for use of instruments. 
SCHOOL OF DESIGN 
Drawing ..... $40.00 per annum. 
Painting in Water-colors 
50.00 " " 
Painting in Oils 
60.00 " " 
Materials for private consumption to be furnished by the 
pupil. 
SCHOOL OF PHYSICAL TRAINING. 
Riding ..... $40.00 per annum. 
Personal equipments, viz., "Riding-habit, Hat, and "Whip, to 
be provided by the pupil. 
The number of extra-collegiate branches allowed to any 
collegiate student, the frequency of the lessons, and the time 
of their continuance, will always be at the discretion of the 
President. 
Should others than collegiate students be admitted to the 
privileges of the " Schools," the terms must be made a matter 
of special arrangement. The rates will be from twenty-five 
to fifty per cent, higher. Such students will be expected to 
board in the College, and will be subject to all its rules and 
regulations. 
(     