      
SCIENTIFIC PAPERS 
OF 
ASA GRAY 
SELECTED BY 
CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT 
VOL. I. 
REVIEWS OF WORKS ON BOTANY AND 
RELATED SUBJECTS 
1834-1887 
BOSTON AND NEW YORK 
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY 
1889 
-%— { MAR . 04 
Copyright, 1889, 
Br CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT. 
rights reserved. 
/'lharvardN 
university! 
linn\RY 
I JUN 2? 1962 J 
7%e Riverside Press, Cambridge : 
Electrotyped and Printed by 11. 0. Houghton & Co. 
INTRODUCTION. 
Asa Gray's first scientific paper was published in 1834 ; 
his last was written in 1887, a few weeks before the end of his 
life. The number of his contributions to science and their 
variety is remarkable, and astonishes his associates even, 
familiar as they were with his intellectual activity, his various 
attainments, and that surprising industry which neither 
assured position, the weariness of advancing years, nor the 
hopelessness of the task he had imposed upon himself, ever 
diminished. 
Professor Gray's writings may be naturally grouped in four 
divisions. The first in importance contains his contributions 
to descriptive botany. These with few exceptions were devoted 
to the flora of North America, and although it did not 
fall to his lot, as it did to that of some of his contemporaries, 
to elaborate any one of the great families of plants, the extent 
and character of his contributions to systematic botany will 
place his name among those of the masters of the science. 
His works of a purely educational character are only second 
in importance to his writings on the flora of North America ; 
and their influence upon the development of botanical knowledge 
in this country, during the half century which elapsed 
between the publication of the first and the last of the series, 
has been great and must long be felt. No text-books of science 
surpass them in the philosophical treatment of the subjects 
they embrace, or in the beauty and clearness of their 
style. 
A series of critical reviews of important scientific publications, 
and of historical accounts of the lives and labors of 
botanical worthies, may be conveniently grouped in the third 
division of Professor Gray's writings ; while in the fourth fall 
a number of papers which owe their existence to the discussions 
which followed the publication of Mr. Darwin's " Origin 
of Species," — discussions in which Professor Gray took in 
this country the foremost position. 
It is not proposed to republish the works of descriptive 
botany, although some of the early and most important of 
these memoirs are out of print and quite beyond the reach 
of the great mass of botanical students. The value of these 
papers, however, is historical only, as all that they contain of 
permanent usefulness has already been incorporated in standard 
works upon the science, or will be used in due time to 
lighten the burden of those upon whom has fallen the task 
of completing the " Flora of North America." There is even 
less reason for reprinting any of the earlier editions of the 
text-books. The last editions contain their author's latest 
views upon the science, and are still within the reach of students. 
Works of this character change necessarily as knowledge 
increases, and the value of every edition of a text-book, 
except the last, is merely historical. 
The philosophical essays, or the most important of them, 
which grew out of the discussion of the Darwinian theory, 
have already been republished by their author, and another 
republication of these papers is therefore not proposed at this 
time, although it is impossible, without having read them, to 
understand rightly Professor Gray's influence upon the intellectual 
movement of his time. 
There remain the reviews, the biographical notices, and a 
few essays upon subjects of general interest to botanists. 
They have long been out of print and have not been incorporated 
in any recent publication. It was believed therefore 
that a reissue of these papers, or a selection from them, would 
be a useful contribution to botanical literature, and a proper 
tribute to the memory of their author ; and for these reasons 
these volumes have been prepared. Many of the reviews are 
filled with original and suggestive observations, and, taken 
together, furnish the best account of the development of 
botanical literature during the last fifty years that has yet 
been written. 
There can hardly be a question with regard to Professor 
Gray's value as a critic. His reviews represented the opinion 
of a just and discriminating mind, thoroughly familiar with 
all sides of the question before it, critical rather than laudatory, 
loving the truth and its investigators, but the truth above 
everything else. No other naturalist of his reputation and 
attainments ever devoted so much time to literary work of this 
sort, or continued it so uninterruptedly for so many years ; 
and in our time the criticism and advice of no other botanist 
has been so eagerly sought or so highly valued by his contem- 
poraries. 
The selection of the articles for republication has been an 
embarrassing and difficult task. The amount of material at 
my disposal has been overwhelming, and desirable as it might 
have been to republish it all, it has not been possible to do 
so within reasonable bounds. More than eleven hundred bibliographical 
notices and longer reviews were published by 
Professor Gray in different periodicals ; and it was necessary 
in preparing these volumes to exclude a number of papers 
of nearly as great interest and value as those which are 
chosen. 
I have endeavored in making this selection to present, as far 
as it is possible to do so in a series of papers written independently 
of each other during a period of more than fifty years, 
a history of the growth of botanical science during a period 
which must remain one of its great eras — a period marked 
by the gradual change of ideas among naturalists upon the 
origin and fixity of the species which has broadened the field 
of all biological investigation ; by the establishment and systematic 
arrangement of vast herbaria gathered from all parts 
of the world ; by the introduction of improved and more philosophical 
methods of investigation in the laboratory ; and by 
the growth of popular appreciation for the value of scientific 
training. I have tried, in making a selection of these articles, 
to display as far as possible the mental grasp of their author 
and his varied attainments in all departments of botany ; and 
to include the reviews of those works which Professor Gray 
himself believed had played in the two continents, during his 
time, the most important part in elevating the science to 
which his whole life was devoted. 
The second and third volumes of this series will contain 
a few essays of general interest, and a selection of the biographical 
sketches of the principal botanists who have died in 
recent years. 
CSS 
Bkookxine, April, 1889. 
CONTENTS. 
— • — 
PAOK 
INTRODUCTION i 
Lindley's Natural System of Botany 1 
Dje Candolle's Prodromus 15 
Endlicher's Genera Plantarum 33 
Harvey's South African Plants 36 
Siebold's Flora of Japan 37 
Moquin-Tandon's Vegetable Monstrosities 40 
Agassiz's Zoological Nomenclator 41 
Von Mohl's Vegetable Cell 51 
Ward's Growth of Plants in Glazed Cases 59 
Hooker and Thomson's Indian Flora 62 
De Candolle's Geographie Botanique 67 
Henfrey's Botany 72 
Naudin on the Genus Cucurbita 83 
Weddell's Monograph of Urticaceje 87 
Badlkofer's Fecundation in the Vegetable Kingdom . . 91 
Hooker on the BALANOPHOKEiE 94 
Boussingault on the Influence of Nitrates .... 100 
Bentham's Hand-Book of the British Flora 104 
Vilmorin' s Improvement of Cultivated Plants .... 109 
Engelmann on the Buffalo Grass 112 
Curtis's Trees of North Carolina 115 
Bentham's Flora of Hong Kong 117 
Hooker's Distribution of Arctic Plants 122 
De Candolle on the Variation and Distribution of Species . 130 
Hooker on Welwitschia 151 
Darwin's Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants . . . 158 
Watson's Botany of the 40th Parallel 180 
Decaisne's Monograph of the Genus Pyrus 186 
Engelmann's Notes on the Genus Yucca 196 
Ruskin's Proserpina 199 
Emerson's Trees and Shrubs of Massachusetts .... 204 
Darwin's Insectivorous Plants 206 
Naudin on Heredity and Variability' in Plants . . . .212 
Darwin's Cross and Self- Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom 
217 
Phytogamy 241 
Bentham's Flora of Australia 246 
De Candolle's New Monographs 248 
Epping Forest 253 
Hooker and Ball's Tour in Marocco 255 
Bentham on Euphorbiacem 259 
Henslow on the Self-Fertilization of Plants .... 203 
Plant Arch2eology 209 
Watson on North American LiLiACEiE 278 
De Candolle's Phytogbaphy 282 
Darwin's Power of Movement in Plants 304 
De Candolle's Origin of Cultivated Plants ..... 311 
Bentham and Hooker's Genera Plantarum 355 
Botanical Nomenclature , _ 355 
Ball's Flora of the Peruvian Andes 384 
REVIEWS. 
LINDLEY'S NATURAL SYSTEM OF BOTANY. 
The cultivators of botany in this country are generally 
acquainted with the former edition of this work through the 
American reprint, edited by Dr. Torrey, and published by 
Messrs. Carvill of New York, in the spring of 1831. Dr. 
Lindley's treatise was, at the time of its appearance, the only 
introduction to the Natural System in the English language, 
if we except a translation of Achille Richard's "Nouveaux 
Siemens de la Botanique," which was published about the 
same period. It is unnecessary to state that a treatise of this 
kind was greatly needed, or to allude either to the peculiar 
qualifications of the learned and industrious author for the 
accomplishment of the task, or the high estimation in which 
the work is held in Europe. But we may very properly offer 
our testimony respecting the great and highly favorable influence 
which it has exerted upon the progress of botanical 
science in the United States. Great as the merits of the 
work undoubtedly are, we must nevertheless be excused from 
adopting the terms of extravagant and sometimes equivocal 
eulogy employed by a popular author, who gravely informs 
his readers that no book, since printed Bibles were first sold 
in Paris by Dr. Faustus, ever excited so much surprise and 
i A Natural System of Botany; or a systematic view of the Organization, 
Natural Affinities, and Geographical Distribution of the whole 
Vegetable Kingdom ; together with the uses of the most important species 
in Medicine, the Arts, and rural or domestic economy. By John 
Lindley. Second edition, with numerous additions and corrections, and 
a complete list of genera and their synonyms. London : 1836. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, xxxii. 292.) 
wonder as did Dr. Torrey's edition of Lindley's " Introduction 
to the Natural System of Botany." Now we can hardly 
believe that either the author or the American editor of the 
work referred to were ever in danger, as was honest Dr. 
Faustus, of being burned for witchcraft, neither do we find 
anything in its pages calculated to produce such astonishing 
effects, except, perhaps, upon the minds of those botanists, if 
such they may be called, who had never dreamed of any 
important changes in the science since the appearance of 
good Dr. Turton's translation of the "Species Plantarum," 
and who speak of Jussieu as a writer who " has greatly improved 
upon the natural orders of Linnagus." 1 We have no 
hesitation, however, in expressing our conviction that no 
single work has had such a general and favorable influence 
upon the advancement of botanical science in this country, 
as the American edition of Dr. Lindley's Introduction 
to the Natural System. This treatise, however useful, 
1 Dr. Lindley is quite right in his remark that the chief difficulties the 
student has to encounter in the study of botany, upon the principles of 
the Natural System, have been very much exaggerated by persons who 
have written upon the subject without understanding it. To refer to a 
single instance. In the fifth edition of the Manual of Botany, by Mr. 
Eaton, an account of the Natural Orders of Jussieu is given, in which the 
genera Ambrosia and Xanthium are referred to Urticece ; and in a note it 
is added, " Some botanists place the last two genera in the order Corymbiferce 
also in the Linnsean class Syngenesia. I see no good reason for 
these innovations." Now Linnseus, in his artificial arrangement, certainly 
did place these genera (and also Parthenium and Iva) in Monoxia Pentandria 
; but the innovator in this instance is Jussieu himself, who never 
referred these two genera to Urticece, but places them in his order Corymbifera 
(Compositm), where they truly belong. The descriptions of Natural 
Orders in Eaton's Manual, purporting to be taken from Jussieu, bear 
a very remote resemblance indeed to the ordinal characters of the admirable 
Genera Plantarum of that author, while the occasional criticisms 
on its supposed errors afford the clearest proof that the work was not 
understood by the author alluded to. It should be recollected that, previously 
to the reprint of Dr. Lindley's Introduction, Mr. Eaton's Manual 
was the only work professing to give a view of the Natural System 
within the reach of the great majority of the botanical students of his 
country, excepting, perhaps, the American edition of Smith's Grammar 
of Botany. 
was indeed not absolutely indispensable to the favored few, 
who, aided by the works of Jussieu, Brown, De Candolle, the 
elder and younger Richard, etc., were already successfully 
and honorably pursuing their studies and investigations ; but 
to the numerous cultivators of botany throughout the country, 
who could seldom be expected to possess, or have access to, 
well-furnished libraries, and to whom the writings of these 
great luminaries of the science were mostly unknown except 
by name, this publication was a truly welcome acquisition, 
conferrino- advantages which those alone who have pursued 
their studies under such unfavorable circumstances can fully 
appreciate. 
A second and greatly improved edition of this work having 
appeared within the past year, it occurred to the writer of 
these remarks that a cursory notice of it might not be unacceptable 
to the readers of the "American Journal of Science." 
We do not intend, in these observations, to engage in a defence 
of what is called the Natural System of Botany, but 
take it for granted that the science can by no other method 
be successfully and philosophically pursued ; or, to employ 
the forcible language of Linnaeus, " Methodus naturalis primus 
et ultimus finis botanices est et erit . . . Primum et 
ultimum in hoc botanicis desideratum est." The few persons 
who remain at this clay unconvinced of its advantages 
are not likely to be affected by any arguments that we could 
adduce. A somewhat larger number may perhaps be found 
in this country who admit the importance and utility of the 
natural arrangement in the abstract, but decline to avail 
themselves of the advantages it affords in the study of plants, 
because, forsooth, it is too much trouble to acquire the enlarged 
views of vegetable structure which are necessary for 
the application of its principles. It would almost seem, from 
the views and practice of such botanists, that they considered 
it the chief object of a classification to afford the means of 
ascertaining the name of an unknown plant by the slightest 
examination of its structure, and with the least possible ex- 
penditure of thought. 
In the first edition, Dr. Lindley entered into some detailed 
explanations to show the fallacy of the common opinion that 
the artificial system of Linnaeus is easy, and the Natural System 
difficult of application. The sentiments of the public 
have undergone so great a change upon this subject within 
the last five or six years that he finds it no longer necessary to 
adduce these considerations, and accordingly commences at 
once with a development of the principles on which the Natural 
System is founded, namely, "That the affinities of plants 
may be determined by a consideration of all the points of 
resemblance between their various parts, properties, and 
qualities ; that thence an arrangement may be deduced in 
which those species will be placed next each other which have 
the greatest degree of relationship; and that consequently 
the quality or structure of an imperfectly known plant may 
be determined by those of another which is well known. 
Hence arises its superiority over arbitrary or artificial systems, 
such as that of Linnaeus, in which there is no combination of 
ideas, but which are mere collections of isolated facts, not having 
any distinct relation to each other." {Preface, p. vii.) 
We have never met with a more clear and succinct account 
of the principles upon which the primary divisions of the 
vegetable kingdom rest than that comprised in the following 
extract. Those acquainted with the first edition will perceive 
that the author has changed his opinions respecting the 
number of these primary divisions or classes; the Gym.nospermrn, 
or Flowering plants with naked ovules (comprising 
the Coniferm, Cycadem, and, according to Brongniart and 
Lindley, the Equisetacem), and the Rhizanthm, as originally 
established by Blume, being here admitted to the 
rank of independent classes. Their claim to this rank, however, 
can as yet be hardly considered as fully established. 
" One of the first things that strikes an inquirer into the 
structure of plants is the singular fact that while all species 
are capable of propagating their race, the mode in which 
this important function is accomplished is essentially different 
in different cases. The great mass of plants produce flowers 
which are succeeded by fruits, containing seed, which is shed 
or scattered abroad, and grows into new individuals. But in 
Ferns, Mosses, Mushrooms, and the like, neither flowers, nor 
seeds properly so called, can be detected ; but propagation is 
effected by the dispersion of grains or spores which are usually 
generated in the substance of the plant, and seem to have 
little analogy with true seeds. Hence the vegetable world 
separates into two distinct groups, the Flowering and the 
Flowerless. Upon examining more closely into the respective 
peculiarities of these two groups, it is found that flowering 
plants have sexes, while flowerless plants have none ; 
hence the former are called Sexual and the latter Asexual. 
Then again the former usually possess a highly developed 
system of spiral or other vessels, while the latter are 
either altogether destitute of them, or have them only in the 
highest orders, and then in a peculiar state : for this reason 
flowering plants are also called Vascular, and flowerless 
Cellular. More than this, all flowering plants when they 
form stems, increase by an extention of their ends and a distention 
or enlargement of their sides ; but flowerless plants 
appear to form their stems simply by the addition of new matter 
to their points ; for this reason, while the former are principally 
Exogens or Endogens, the latter are called Acrogens. 
Flowering plants are also for the most part furnished with 
respiratory organs or stomates, while flowerless plants are to 
a great extent destitute of them. No one then can doubt that 
in the vegetable kingdom, two most essentially distinct divisions 
exist, the Flowering and the Flowerless, and that these 
differ not in one circumstance only, but are most essentially 
unlike in many points both of organization and physiology.^ 
" In like manner, Flowering plants are themselves divisible 
into equally well-marked groups. Some of them grow 
by the addition of the new woody matter to the outside of 
their stem beneath the bark; these are Exogens: others 
grow by the addition of new woody matter to the inside of 
their stem near the centre ; these are Endogens. But Exogens 
have two or more cotyledons to their embryo, and hence are 
called Dicotyledons; while Endogens have only one cotyledon, 
and are, therefore, Monocotyledons. Exogens have the 
young external wood connected with the centre by medullary 
processes ; Endogens, having no occasion for such a provision, 
are destitute of it. In Exogens the leaves have their 
veins disposed in a netted manner ; in Endogens the veins 
run parallel with each other. The number of parts in the 
flower of an Exogen is usually five or its multiples ; in an Endogen 
it is usually three or its multiples. In germination the 
young root of Exogens is a mere extension of the radicle ; but 
of Endogens it is protruded from within the radicle ; hence 
the former have been named Exorhizce, and the latter Endorhizm. 
In this case, then, as in the last, we have two groups 
differing entirely from each other in their germination, 
the structure of their stem and leaves, their mode of growth, 
the arrangements of the parts of the flower, and in the organization 
of their embryo. It is impossible, therefore, not 
to recognize such groups also as natural. 
" To this separation of the vegetable kingdom into Exogens, 
Endogens, and Acrogens, or by whatever synonymous 
names these groups may be known, many botanists confine 
themselves. But there are two others, of subordinate importance, 
perhaps, but nevertheless characterized by circumstances 
of a similar nature, and therefore, I think, to be 
esteemed of equal dignity with them. In true Exogens and 
Endogens, the fertilizing principle is communicated to the 
young seeds through the medium of a stigma which terminates 
a case or pericarp in which they are inclosed. But in 
some plants otherwise Exogens, the fertilizing principle of 
the pollen is applied immediately to the seeds, without the 
intervention of any pericarpial apparatus, and they bear the 
same relation to other Exogens as frogs and similar reptiles 
to other animals. These plants, therefore, are separated as a 
distinct class, under the name of Gymnosperms. Like the 
other groups of the same grade, these are also found to possess 
peculiarities of a subordinate nature. For instance, 
they have in many cases more cotyledons than two, whence 
they have been called Polycotyledons ; their radicle usually 
adheres to the albumen in which the embryo lies, and that 
circumstance has given rise to the name Synorhizm. The 
veins of their leaves, when they have any veins, are either 
simple or forked ; in which respect they approach Endogens 
on the one hand, and Acrogens on the other. And finally, 
their vascular system is very imperfect compared with that 
of other Exogens of an equal degree of development. 
" The other group, called Rhizanthm, is far less correctly 
known, but it seems to stand as it were between Endogens 
and Acrogens of the lowest grade ; agreeing with the latter 
in the absence or very imperfect state of the vascular system, 
in a general resemblance to Fungi, and in the apparent seeds 
being mere masses of sporules ; but apparently according 
with Endogens in the ternary number of their floral envelopes, 
and in the presence of fully developed sexes. 
" Certainly there is no possibility of obtaining such important 
primary groups as these by any kind of artificial contrivance." 
{Preface, pp. x.-xii.) 
The grand natural divisions of the natural kingdom are, 
therefore, perfectly obvious, and may be very clearly defined. 
With our present knowledge of vegetable structure no great 
difficulty is experienced in characterizing the orders of natural 
families, and all subordinate groups. The great desideratum 
has ever been to effect such an arrangement of the 
orders under the primary classes that each family should be 
placed next to those which it most nearly resembles. This 
might easily be accomplished, if the idea once so strongly insisted 
upon by poets and metaphysicians, of a chain of beings, 
a regular gradation, by a single series, from the most perfect 
and complicated to the most simple forms of existence, had 
any foundation in truth. On the contrary, nothing is more 
evident than that almost every order, or other group, is 
allied not merely to one or two, but often to several others, 
which are sometimes widely separate from each other ; and, 
indeed, these several points of resemblance, or affinity, are occasionally 
of about equal importance. A truly natural lineal 
arrangement is therefore impracticable, since by it only one 
or two out of several points of agreement can be indicated. 
As this method is, however, the only one that can be followed 
in books, all that can be done is to arrange the orders in such 
a manner as to offer the least possible interruption to their 
natural affinities. The number of orders is so large that 
practical convenience seems to require their arrangement into 
groups subordinate to the primary classes; and when manifestly 
natural assemblages cannot be recognized, we are 
obliged to employ those which, being less strongly marked, 
and distinguished by a smaller number of characters, are 
apparently of a more artificial nature. The arrangement employed 
by the learned Jussieu, in his celebrated " Genera 
Plantarum," although to a considerable extent artificial, has 
been almost universally adopted, until within the last few 
years. 
In this method Dicotyledonous plants are primarily divided 
into three groups : the first including those with a polypetalous 
corolla ; the second, those with a monopetalous corolla ; 
and the third, those destitute of a corolla. These sections are 
subdivided (as also the Monocotyledons) by means of characters 
taken from the insertion of the stamens (or corolla), 
whether hypogynous, perigynous, or epigynous. The arrangement 
here pursued, which is too well known to require further 
notice, is substantially adopted by De Candolle, the difference 
being more in appearance than in reality. Dr. Lindley discarded 
these subdivisions in the first edition of his work ; but 
the new distribution of the orders therein proposed possesses 
few advantages, and indeed seems not to have satisfied the 
author himself. In the same year with the publication of the 
work just mentioned, the " Ordines Plantarum " of Bartling 
appeared, in which a more natural arrangement of the orders 
is attempted by the formation of aggregate or compound orders, 
as originally proposed, and in several instances successfully 
accomplished, by Robert Brown. An analogous plan 
was pursued by Agardh in his " Aphorismi Botanici " (1817), 
and again in his " Classes Plantarum " (1825) ; but these attempts, 
however ingenious, do not seem to have obviated, in 
any considerable degree, the inconveniences of lineal arrangement. 

We now return to our author, whose views upon this subject 
have been materially modified since the original publication 
of his Introduction of the Natural System. The method 
now employed was first sketched in the " Nixus Plantarum " 
(1832), and afterwards in the " Key to Structural, Physiological, 
and Systematic Botany " l (1835), and is more fully 
developed and illustrated in the work before us. He now 
admits, as we have already seen, five primary classes, two of 
which, however, are much smaller than the others and of subordinate 
importance, and may be considered as transition 
classes, namely, Gymnospermm, which connect Exogens with 
the higher Acrogens, and Rhizanthce, which form the transition 
from Endogens to Acrogens of the lowest grade. The 
great class Exogenm {Bicotyledones of Jussieu) is divided 
into three subclasses, namely : — 
1. Polypetalm ; those with the floral envelopes consisting 
of both calyx and corolla, the latter composed of distinct 
petals. 
2. Monopetalm ; those with the petals combined in a monopetalous 
corolla. 
3. Incompletm ; those always destitute of a corolla, the 
calyx also often incomplete or absent. 
Thus far this mode of subdivision is nearly the same with 
that of Jussieu ; Dr. Lindley, however, neglecting altogether 
the character afforded by the insertion of the stamens, divides 
the polypetalous orders into seven, and the Monopetalm and 
Incompletm each into five sections or groups. As a specimen 
of this plan, we copy the names of the groups of the first subclass, 
witli their synoptical characters. 
1. Albuminosm. Embryo very considerably shorter and 
smaller than the albumen. 
2. Epigyinosm. Ovary inferior, usually having an epigynous 
disk. 
3. Parietosm. Placentation parietal. 
4. Calycosm. Calyx incompletely whorled ; two of the 
sepals being exterior. 
5. Syncarposm. None of the characters of the other 
groups, and with the carpels compactly united. 
1 This excellent little work consists of an augmented edition of the 
author's Outlines of the First Principles of Botany, with a revised trans- 
lation of the Nixus Plantarum. 
6. Gynobaseosm. Carpels not exceeding five, diverging 
at the base, arranged in a single row around an elevated axis 
or gynobase. Stamens usually separate from the calyx. 
7. Apocarposm. None of the characters of the other 
groups, but with the carpels distinct, or separable by their 
faces, or solitary. 
Next, every group is divided into smaller groups, each of 
which includes one, two, or several orders. These minor groups 
are called Alliances, and are distinguished by the termination 
ales. Thus, under the Albuminose group, we have : — 
Alliance 1. Ranales, comprising the Ranunculacece, Papaveracem 
(with its suborder, as Lindley, following Bernhardt 
considers it, FumariecE), Nymphmacem, (to which 
Hydropeltidem is improperly joined), and Nelumbiaceai ; 
Alliance 2. Anonales, which comprehends the Nutmeg 
tribe, the Anonaeem, Magnoliacem, etc. ; 
Alliance 3. Umbellales, including the Umbelliferous tribe, 
with the nearly allied Araliacem ; 
Alliance 4. Grossales, consisting chiefly of the Grossulacem 
or currant tribe ; and lastly, 
Alliance 5. Pittosporales, which strikes us as a singularly 
heterogeneous assemblage, bringing together into one group 
the Vitacem, Pittosporacem, Olacacem, Francoacem, and Sarraceniace<B. 

All the subclasses and groups, both of Exogens and Endogens, 
are subdivided in a similar manner ; but we cannot here 
proceed further with our enumeration. It will be borne in 
mind that the chief object of an arrangement of this kind 
is to facilitate the study of the natural orders, by dividing the 
extensive primary classes into sections of convenient size, and 
to dispose these groups, and the orders they comprise, as 
nearly in accordance with their respective affinities and relationships 
as a lineal arrangement will allow. It is impossible, 
in the present state of our knowledge, to say how far the 
views of our author will ultimately be approved. Every attempt 
of the kind must necessarily be very imperfect, so long 
as the structure of only a limited portion of the whole vegetable 
kingdom has been attentively and completely examined ; 
and the author is well aware " that this part of the work will 
require many great changes and improvements before it can 
be considered at all established." Notwithstanding the objections 
to which it is liable in many particulars, we agree 
with the author in the opinion, " that even in its present state 
it will be found to be attended with many advantages, and 
that every step which may be taken in determining the limits 
of the natural groups subordinate to the primary classes must 
be a decided gain to the science. So rapid is the advance of 
our knowledge of the vegetable kingdom, and so numerous are 
the new types of structure that present themselves to the systematic 
botanist, that it is to be feared lest another chaos 
should be brought on by the masses of imperfectly grouped 
species with which the science will soon abound." 
The names of natural orders, as first established, do not 
appear to have been framed in accordance with any uniform 
rule, as to derivation or mode of termination. They were 
sometimes intended to express some characteristic feature 
(Ex. Leguminosee, Labiates, Cruciferm, Umbelliferm, Goniferm, 
etc.), but more commonly some genus was selected as the 
type of the family, which was designated either by the plural 
of the genus simply (as Myrti, Tilia, Irides, Euphorbim), 
or with a slight prolongation (as Orchidem, Jasminem, etc.), 
or with the termination still further modified (as in Cyperoulece, 
Aroidem, Boraginem, or Ranunculacem, Rosacem, 
Cucurbitacem, etc.). The derivation of the name of the order 
from some prominent genus is now the universal practice ; 
and for the sake of uniformity as well as to distinguish such 
names from those of genera in the plural number, the termination 
acem is given to orders, and that of em to suborders, etc. 
The advantages of uniformity in this respect is manifest, and 
Dr. Lindley therefore insists upon the adoption of the rule in 
all cases. In the " Key to Botany," published the year previous 
to the appearance of the second edition of the present 
work, the termination in acem is employed, not only in the 
names of orders formed from those of genera, but also in the 
ew still in use which relate to some peculiarity in the habit 
°t the family. Thus instead of Cruciferm, Umbelliferm, 
Conifer m, etc., we have Cruciacem, Umbellacem, and Conaeem. 
These are, however, very properly abandoned in the 
work before us, in which the author inclines to give up the 
old and familiar names of these orders, and to substitute those 
formed in the customary manner from well-known genera. 
Brassicacem, Apiacem, and Pinacem may certainly be as good 
names as any other when we once get accustomed to them, 
but it seems hardly necessary to make any change in names 
of this kind. Dr. Lindley, as we have already seen, gives to 
the names of Alliances the termination ales, and to groups that 
of osce. The chief advantage of this system is, that the name 
of any group at once indicates its rank and importance. 
The value of this work is greatly increased by the complete 
list of o-enera (so far as known at the time of publication), 
with the principal synonyms, appended to each order and 
properly arranged under their several suborders, sections, etc. 
This laborious and difficult task is upon the whole very faithfully 
executed. We observe, however, several errors, typographical 
and otherwise, which are not noticed in the appendix 
; and in a few instances the same genus is referred to two 
different orders. The whole catalogue will doubtless be rendered 
more perfectly accurate in a future edition. 
The whole number of genera comprised in this enumeration, 
exclusive of synonyms, is 7840. Sprengel's " Systema 
Vegetabilium," which was finished in 1827, contains (exclusive 
of the appendix) only 3593 genera, or not quite half the 
number now known ; while the twelfth edition of " Systema 
NaturaA' (the last of Linnaeus himself) comprises 1228 
o-enera, or only about a third more than are now known in 
a single family. 
This great and rapid increase is perhaps chiefly owing to 
the discovery of new plants ; but it is also attributable in a 
good degree to the more accurate knowledge of those already 
known. ° In either case, it is the natural result of the progress 
of discovery; and instead of embarrassing the student, as is 
often supposed, does in reality render the study of the science 
much more clear and satisfactory. Notwithstanding the 
great increase of genera within the last few years, it may 
be safely said that at no previous period could a really useful 
knowledge of the vegetable kingdom be acquired with so little 
labor. In hazarding this remark, it is of course taken for 
granted that the student will avail himself of all the advantages 
of modern physiological botany and of the natural system 
: for so rapid has been the discovery of new and strange 
forms of structure, for which the artificial arrangement of 
Linnaeus makes no provision, that the student who takes that 
system as his guide has indeed a hopeless task before him. 
The essential characters of the orders appear to have been 
very carefully revised in this edition, as also the remarks 
upon their affinities, geographical distribution and sensible 
properties. Did our limits allow, we might call the attention 
of our readers more particularly to this part of the work. We 
cannot bring our remarks to a close, however, without suggesting 
what we consider a very desirable improvement upon 
the manner in which the seed is described, not only in this, but 
m almost all modern systematic works. It is very necessary 
that an organ which affords such important characters, both 
as to its situation in the fruit, and particularly as to its internal 
structure, should be described with the greatest possible 
clearness and precision, and in a uniform manner. The 
prevalent fault of which we complain is thus noticed, as long 
ago as the year 1811, by that most acute botanist, the late 
L. C. Richard. 
" Caesalpinus, Adanson, Jussieu, and Gaertner, always take 
into view the direction of the embryo relative to the pericarp 
merely. This method appears to me improper : first, because 
it does not indicate with precision that direction which is most 
important to be understood ; secondly, because the pericarpic 
direction of the embryo is often difficult to be ascertained, and 
is sometimes variable or even wholly different in the seeds of 
the same fruit. I have already shown by numerous examples 
in my ' Analyse du Fruit,' that the best method is to indicate 
the direction of the seed relative to the pericarp, and of the 
embryo relative to the seed." 
In very many descriptions, the direction of the embryo relative 
to the seed can only be inferred from the pericarpic 
direction, or, which is still more objectionable, the same structure 
is described by very different language in different instances, 
thus rendering unnecessarily complicated an investigation 
which of itself is not usually difficult. We may adduce 
as an example the five orders comprised in the alliance Ranales, 
which stands at the commencement of Dr. Lindley's 
treatise. We have no means of ascertaining, from the essential 
character of any one of these orders, either the spermic 
direction and position of the embryo, or the situation of the 
chalaza and micropyle relative to the hilum, from which the 
former may be inferred. It is commonly stated that the embryo 
is situated at the base of the albumen ; but it is not 
specified whether the radicle is next the hilum (as in Papaveracem, 
Nymphmacem, etc.), or points in the opposite direction 
(as in Nelumbiacem and Cabombacem) ; a matter of 
essential importance, since the seeds result in the one case 
from the ripening of anatropous, and in the other of orthotropous, 
ovules. 
The students of botany in this country are greatly indebted 
to the learned editor and the enterprising publishers of the 
first American edition of this work. May we hope to have 
our obligations increased by the reprint of this greatly improved 
edition ? 
DE CANDOLLE'S PRODROMUS. 
The second part of the seventh volume of De Candolle's 
"Prodromus" 1 — with which our notices may appropriately 
commence — was published at the very close of last year, and 
comprises the following orders, namely, Styliclem, Lobeliacem, 
Campanidacecß, Cyphiacem (a very small order, founded on 
the Cape genus Cyphia, and here first proposed by Alphonse 
De Candolle), Goodenoviem, Gesneriacem, Napoleonem, Vaccinem, 
Ericacem, Epacridem, Pyrolacem, Erancoacem, and 
Monotropem. Of these, the Lobeliacem, Campanulacem, and 
Cyphiacem were elaborated by Professor Alphonse De Candolle, 
the well-known son of the distinguished author ; the Vaccinece 
by Professor Dunal of Montpelier ; and the tribe Ericem 
(the Heath-tribe) was prepared by Mr. Bentham. It will be 
observed that De Candolle has disposed the Ericacem nearly 
m the manner first proposed in the " Theorie Elementaire," 
considering the Vacciniem, Monotropem, Pyrolacem, etc., as 
so many distinct families ; a view, however, which will not 
probably be ultimately adopted. Among the uncertain or 
bttle known Ericaceous plants, De Candolle has introduced 
the genus Pickeringia of Nuttall (which was founded upon 
Cyrilla paniculata of the same author, published in the fifth 
volume of this Journal) ; this, however, has been long since 
ascertained to be a species of Ardisia, which belongs to a very 
different order ; and Mr. Nuttall has accordingly recently dedi- 
De Candolle. Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis, etc. 
Pars VII., sectio ii. Paris, 1839 (American Journal of Science and Arts, 
xxxix. 168). — Pars VIII. Paris, 1844 (Ibid., xlvii. 198). — Pars IX. 
Paris, 1845 (Ibid., 2 ser., i. 174). — Pars XL Paris, 1847 (Ibid., 2 ser 
v. 449). — Pars XII. Paris, 1848 (Ibid., 2 ser, vii. 309). — Pars XIII ' 
sectio ii. Paris, 1849 (Ibid, 2 ser, viii. 300). -Pars XIV, sectio ii! 
Pans, 1857 (Ibid, 2 ser, xxv. 290). — Pars XVI., seetio i. Paris, 1870 
(ibid, 2 ser, xlvii. 125). — Pars XVII. etc. Paris, 1873 (Ibid, 3 ser, 
vu. 66). v > > 
cated to Dr. Pickering a curious Leguminous plant from California. 
The genus Galax, De Candolle has appended to Pyrolacem 
(tribe Galacem), a view which seems to be confirmed 
by an unpublished plant from the mountains of North Carolina, 
which, in compliment to an assiduous and well-known 
American botanist, will bear the name of Shortia galacifolia. 
The prior portion of the seventh volume (published in 
1838), as well as the whole of the fifth (1836) and sixth 
(1837), is exclusively devoted to the immense family of the 
Compositm (the class Syngenesia of Linnaeus), which fills 
more than 1700 closely printed pages, the immediate preparation 
of which occupied the indefatigable author for seven 
years ! We may take this family as a fair example of the 
increase in the number of known species within the last 
eighty years. The whole number of Syngenesious plants 
described by Linnaeus, in the first edition of the " Species 
Plantarum " (published in 1753), including the few Compositm 
referred to other classes, is 555, which is about 150 less 
than the now described species of the single genus Senecio. 
We have not time nor space to enumerate the species of the 
order in succeeding systematic works, so as to show the progressive 
increase. Suffice it to say that the whole number 
known to Linnaeus and published during his lifetime cannot 
exceed 800 species, while the number described by De Candolle 
is in round numbers about 8700, which are disposed in 
893 genera. If to these we were to add the species which 
have been since published, or are being published in works 
now in progress, and also the very numerous unpublished species 
which exist in all large collections, making at the same 
time reasonable allowance for nominal species, the number 
of Compositm at present known would scarcely fall short of 
10,000, which considerably exceeds the whole number of both 
flowering and flowerless plants described by Linnaeus or his 
contemporaries. Of the 8700 species given by De Candolle, 
more than 3000 are described for the first time in this 
work. In the general disposition of the order, the clear and 
simple classification of Lessing is to a great degree adopted. 
It is first divided into three great series, namely : — 
1. TuBULiFLORiE ; those with the perfect flowers tubular 
and regularly five (or rarely four) toothed. 
2. Labiatiflorjs ; those with bilabiate, or two-cleft, perfect 
flowers. 
3. Ligulifloile ; which have all the flowers strap-shaped. 
The first series includes about four fifths of the whole fam- 
ily, which are arranged in five tribes, namely, Vernonidcem, 
Eupatoriacem, Asteroidem, Senecionidem and Cynarem. The 
second series consists exclusively of the Mutisiacem and the 
Nassauviacem, chiefly South American plants ; a single species 
of Chaptalia is, we believe, the only North American 
representative. The third series, comprising the Chicoracem, 
so readily known by their milky juice, and by having all 
their florets ligulate, contains many North American representatives. 

So many orders or separate genera of Monopetalous plants 
have been the subject of recent monographs, and so much 
valuable assistance is also engaged for the ensuing portions 
of the " Prodromus," that several volumes may be expected 
at no very distant period. It may not be improper to state 
that Mr. Boissier of Geneva is engaged in the preparation of 
the Plumbaginem; Mr. Duby of Geneva will prepare the 
Primulacem ; Professor Dunal of Montpelier, the Solanem ; 
Mr. Decaisne of Paris, the Asclepiadece ; and Mr. Bentham, 
the Scropihularinem and Labiatm. 
We can at length announce the publication of this important 
volume (viii.) ; the first of the series under the editorship 
of the son of the great Genevan botanist, 1 and which he 
has appropriately dedicated to the memory of his illustrious 
father. We are glad to state, that arrangements have been 
made to expedite the publication of the succeeding volumes. 
The printing of the ninth, it is said, has already commenced, 
and its appearance may be expected in the autumn of the 
present year. It will contain the Loganiacem, Bignoniacem, 
Cyrtandracem, Sesamem, and Borraginem, from the notes 
prepared by the late Professor De Candolle ; the Hydrophyllacem, 
by Alphonse De Candolle ; the Gentianacem, by Grise- 
1 The elder De Candolle died September 9, 1841. 
bach; the Polemoniacem, by Bentham, and the Convolvulacem, 
by Choisy. The tenth volume will be occupied with the 
Solanacem, by Dunal, and the Scrophularinece, by Bentham ; 
in the elaboration of which orders, these two distinguished 
botanists are now actively engaged. The first order in the 
volume before us, the Bentibula.riem, is prepared by the editor. 
The North American species of Utricularia are distributed 
into three sections, namely : 1. Megacista, where 
the verticillate foliage is floated by inflated petioles ; 2. Lentibularia, 
where the capillary segments of the submersed 
foliage are utriculiferous ; and 3. Oligocista, where the 
leaves are few, undivided, and disappear after flowering ; the 
roots strike into the soil or mud, and generally bear the utriculi, 
when these are present. U. resupinata, discovered by 
B. D. Greene, Esq., and first mentioned in the Massachusetts 
Catalogue of Plants and Animals, 1835, is wrongly placed 
by De Candolle among the yellow-flowered species of the 
second section. It has purple flowers and should stand next 
U. purpurea. The name U. Greenei, Oaks, in " Hovey's 
Magazine " must stand as a synonym, as there is no good 
reason for changing the prior name imposed by the discoverer. 
The order of Primulacem is elaborated by M. Duby of 
Geneva, who follows Endlicher in the general distribution of 
the family. From some inadvertence, Glaux maritima is 
not cited as an American plant. Naumburgia thyrsiflora, 
Moench, = Lysimachia thyrsiflora, Linn., and L. capitata, 
Pursh. The L. revoluta, Nutt., is referred to L. longifolia, 
Pursh. The common Samolus, of the southwestern United 
States, which has smaller flowers than the true S. Valerandi, 
is referred to S. floribundus, HBK. S. ebracteatus is not 
noticed as a plant of the United States, although it is common 
along our southern borders, nor is it distinguished even 
as a subgenus, although, on account of its nearly free ovary 
and want of sterile filaments, a recent writer (M. Baudo, in 
Ann. Sci. Nat., Dec. 1843) has separated it, to form his 
genus Samodia. In the Myrsinacece, elaborated by the 
editor, we meet with two North American species, both 
natives of Florida, namely, Myrsine Floridana, A. DC, 
and Ardisia Pickeringia, Torr. and Gr. To the small order 
Theophrastacem, A. DC, our author has joined Jacquinia, 
a West Indian genus, one species of which extends into 
Florida. In the order Sapotacem, the editor has proposed 
one new North American species of Bumelia. In Ebenacem 
we have only our Persimmon. From this the order Styracem 
(embracing Symplocinem and Halesiacem of Don) is distino-uished 
chiefly by the position of the cells of the ovary 
opposite the lobes of the calyx. Hopea is kept as a mere 
section of Syniplocos ; including a dozen Asiatic species as 
well as our S. tinctoria. 
The order Oleacem is published from the manuscripts of 
the late Professor De Candolle. The American species of 
Fraxinus still require the labors of a monographer. 
The order Jasminem is made to comprehend Bolivaria (of 
which there is at least one Texan species) and Menodora ; 
and the family Bolivariacem is shown to have been founded 
upon misconceived characters. 
For the elaboration of the Apocynacem, we are indebted to 
the younger De Candolle. The only North American genera 
are Amsonia (is not Echites Eraseri, Roem. and Schultes, 
the A. ciliata, Walt. ?), Apocynum and Forsteronia (JF. difformis, 
DC, = Echites difformis, Walt.). 
The order Asclepiadem has been very faithfully studied by 
Decaisne. All the North American representatives belong 
to the tribe of true Asclepiadem, with the exception of 
Gonolobus, of which we have several species (one of them, 
collected by Dr. Short, forms the new G. tiliafolius), and 
one, or possibly two species of Chthamalia, Decaisne. Metastelma 
Eraseri is probably a native of the West Indies, 
not of Carolina. Enslenia albida, we notice, is about to be 
figured in the forthcoming volume of Delessert's Icones ; as 
also is Podostigma. Acerates includes ten, chiefly North 
American species. Asclepias is reduced to forty-four species, 
all of which are American, and the greater part extra-tropical. 
We are happy to learn that the plates of the fifth volume 
of the " Icones Selectae " of the liberal Delessert — chiefly 
devoted to the illustration of the eighth volume of the " Prodromus 
" — are already in the hands of the engraver. 
A year ago we had the pleasure to notice the eighth volume 
of this indispensable work, the Ist of the series under the 
editorship of Professor Alphonse De Candolle. The ninth 
volume, now before us, was issued on the Ist of January 
last ; and the forthcoming portions are in course of preparation 
under such favorable circumstances that we may now 
confidently look for the appearance of a volume a year, and for 
the full completion of this " Species Plantarum," according 
to the natural system, at no very distant period. We have 
already mentioned the arrangements that arc made to secure 
this desirable consummation, and by which the work becomes 
as it were a series of separate monographs, prepared by the 
most skilful hands, under the superintendence of a common 
editor. Every botanist is aware of the improvement of the 
successive volumes as they appeared from the unrivalled hands 
of the elder De Candolle ; and a further improvement is manifest 
in the later portions, elaborated or revised by his son, 
especially in the introduction of characters drawn from aestivation, 
placentation, the structure of the ovule, and other 
points which have only quite recently been turned to special 
account by systematic botanists. A particular account of a 
volume which is or soon will be in the hands of every workinobotanist, 
cannot be necessary, and we have not time at present 
for special enumeration. The ninth volume commences with 
the Loganiacece, by Alphonse De Candolle. The genus 
Coelostylis, Torr. and Gr., is correctly reduced to Spigelia. 
Under this order we have a tribe created for the lono--vexed 
Gelsemium, which we suspect is not yet finally at rest. Next 
follows the Gentiana,cem, elaborated by Grisebach, whose 
recent monograph of that family, which forms the basis of 
the present arrangement, was duly noticed in this Journal. 
The order Bignoniacem is edited from the manuscripts of the 
elder De Candolle ; as are also the orders Sesamem and Cyrtandracem, 
which last has been reduced by Mr. Brown to Gesneriacem. 
The Hydrophyllacem are elaborated by Alphonse 
De Candolle, in which, by attributing generic importance to 
the presence or absence of the appendages or nectariferous 
scales within the tube of the corolla, the number of genera is 
perhaps too greatly increased. The Polemoniacem are admirably 
worked out by Bentham, who has reduced to sections of 
Gilia his Hugelia, Fenzlia, Linanthus, Dactylophyllum, Leptosiphon, 
Leptodactylon, and the Ipomopsis, Michx. The 
elaboration of the Convolvulacece by Professor Choisy does 
not appear to give entire satisfaction to botanists. The term 
" infelicissime intricatus " is perhaps still applicable to their 
family ; and the genera are probably unduly increased in 
number. Of the Borraginem, printed from the elder De 
Candolle's manuscripts, with valuable notes and additions by 
the editor, we have the first three tribes, namely, Cordiem, 
Ehretiem, and Heliotropem. But for the true Borragem 
we must wait until the appearance of the tenth volume, which 
is already in press. 
The long-expected eleventh volume of this work was published 
at the close of November last, or rather in December, 
and is now in the hands of botanists throughout Europe and 
America. It comprises, first, the Orobanchacem, by Mr. 
Reuter of Geneva ; the true genera of which are Epipbegus 
of the United States ; Phelipaea, containing thirty-eight species 
of the Old World, and two of North America west of the 
Mississippi ; Conopholis (for the Orobanche Americana, L.) ; 
Orobanche of over ninety species belonging to the temperate 
regions of the Old World ; Boschniakia of two high northwest 
American and Siberian species ; Clandestina of one south 
European species ; Lathraja of two Old World species ; and 
Anoplanthus, Endl. (Anoplon, Wallr.), which is made to 
embrace not only the three genuine species of North America, 
but also a separate section corresponding with Anblatum, 
Endl., of two species of Central Asia. The earlier recent 
name of this last genus is Gymnocaulis, Nutt. ; the next is 
Anoplon, by Wallroth. This was changed by Endlicher to 
Anoplanthus, because there is an Anoplon in zoology —an 
insufficient reason — with which, however, we need not trouble 
ourselves, since all three must give way to the early and excellent 
name of Aphyllon, founded by Mitchell, and published 
in 1748, on the typical species afterwards called Orobanche 
uniflora by Linnaeus. This name, the revival of which is 
demanded not only by statute law, but also for the avoidance 
of the intricately conflicting names recently imposed, was 
adopted in the MSS. for this family prepared for the " Flora 
of North America," and also in the writer's " Manual of the 
Botany of the Northern United States." Besides A. uniflorum, 
we have in the West and North, A. comosum, and A. 
fasciculatum. To the Genera affinia vel dubia, Reuter appends 
Obolaria, which is correctly described, except that the 
insertion of the ovules over the whole inner surface of the 
ovary is overlooked ; the present writer's illustration of this 
genus not having reached Geneva until after this family was 
printed off. 
The great family of this volume, occupying almost four 
hundred pages, is the order Aeanthacem, which is contributed 
by Nees von Esenbeck. This chiefly tropical or subtropical 
family, founded less than forty years ago upon a small number 
of genera and species, now ranks among the largest of the 
monopetalous series, and is arranged by Nees under two suborders, 
eleven tribes, and 146 genera (including those of the 
appendix). We have few Acanthacece in the United States, 
so that an analysis of the family would not interest our 
readers. We are pleased to find that the writer's reference 
of the Ruellia justicimflora, Hook, (the Eberlea of Riddell), 
to the genus Hygrophila, R. Br. (vide PI. Lindheim, p. 22, 
note), is confirmed by Nees von Esenbeck. It appears that 
the species is also Mexican, and had been already described 
by Schlechtendal. Our Ruelliae belong to Dipteracanthus 
and Calophanes. Our Bianthera Americana, L., with its 
allies, is included in the large genus Rhytiglossa, established 
by Nees (in Lindl. Introd. Nat. Syst., ed. 2) a few years 
ago, on some Cape of Good Hope species, from which the 
author suggests that the American species may differ generically. 
However that may be, we urgently protest against 
this suppression of the old Gronovian and Linnaean genus, 
Dianthera, which was founded upon our species ; and which 
name, although unaccountably overlooked by Endlicher, who 
is usually careful, as well as by Nees, who is careless, as to 
questions of priority, must surely be continued for the genus, 
however bounded, which includes the Justicia pedunculosa 
and J. humilis of Michaux. 
The remainder of the volume, contributed by Schauer of 
Breslau, comprises, first, Phrymacem, another of these inconvenient 
little orders established on a single genus of a single 
species, which, however, differs remarkably from Verbenacea? 
as well as Babiatm, by the monomerous ovary, with a single 
orthotropous ovule erect from the base of the cell, an embryo 
with the radicle superior, and convolute cotyledons ; and 
finally, the Verbenacem, composed of three tribes (the Verbenem,Viticem,Avicenniem),ten. 
subtribes, and forty-two genera. 
The genus Verbena, with which we are principally concerned 
in the United States, comprises seventy-one species, 
besides a dozen dubious ones appended at the close. 
We had nearly forgotten the small family Myoporacem, 
which is elaborated by Professor Alphonse De Candolle himself. 
These twelve genera are all Australian or Oceanic, 
except Bontia, which is a Caribbean genus of a single species. 
The twelfth volume, which will contain the Labiatm by 
Bentham, is promised for June. 
The twelfth volume of the "Prodromus," delayed somewhat 
by the convulsions of the continent, will be welcome to botanists. 
It concludes the series of Monopetalm, with the exception 
of the small family Plantaginacece, and the large one 
of Solanacem, which last, Professor Dunal — from whom it 
has long been due — appears to find by no means easy to elaborate. 
Of the present volume, all but one hundred pages are 
occupied by the Labiatm., from the hand of the most unwearied 
and best of monographers, Mr. Bentham. The plants of this 
large order, arranged in 101 genera, are thrown into eight 
tribes, instead of the eleven in the " Labiatarum Genera et 
Species ; " the Satureiem now being made to comprehend the 
Menthoidem and the Melissinem of the earlier work, and the 
Scutellarinem being merged in the Stachydem. The Ocimoidem, 
comprising nineteen genera, are represented in extratropical 
North America solely by one or two species of 
Hyptis, which inhabit our southeastern frontiers. 
Of the Satureiem we have Mentha, Lycopus, a single Cu- 
nila, Pycnanthemum (the whole seventeen species), an anomalous 
Satureia {S. rigida, Bartr.), three species of Micromeria 
; while to Calamintha is now referred the former M. glabella 
and M. Nuttallii, as well as the Gardoquia Hookeri, 
Benth, with the new C. canescens, Torr and Gr., MSS., and 
C. Caroliniana, Sweet (Thymus, Michx.) ; also two species 
of Dicerandra (of which B. densiflora is a new one from 
Florida) ; the California Pogogyne ; Hedeoma, including 
H. ciliata {Keithia ciliata, Benth., Lab.) ; and Collinsonia, 
of which six species are recognized. 
Of the tribe Monardem we possess a small portion of the 
vast genus Salvia, which is increased to 407 species ; Audibertia 
of California, of six species ; Monarda, of six species 
{AT didyma and M. fistulosa being retained nearly as in the 
earlier monograph) ; and Blephilia, of two species. 
The tribe Nepetem affords us Lophanthus ; a single Dracocephalnm; 
and a Cedronella. 
The tribe Stachydem furnishes Prunella, for which Alphonse 
De Candolle restores, with satisfactory reasons given, 
the orthography, Brunella; Scutellaria, of eighty-six species, 
sixteen of them North American ; Physostegia, of which two 
species are admitted ; Brazoria, Engelm. — Gray (in which 
the synonym " Physostegia truncata, Hook. Botanical Magazine, 
t. 3494," should be cited under B. scutellarioides, as 
shown in Chlor. Bor.-Amer., and not under B. truncataj : 
Macbridea and Synandra, each of a single species ; and 
Stachys (from which Betonica is now excluded), of 168 
species. 
The tribe Prasiai belongs entirely to the Old World and to 
the Sandwich Islands ; and the tribe Prostantherem is exclusively 
Australian. 
Of the Ajugem we have Isanthus, Trichostemma (in which 
a corrected view is taken of the inflorescence of the typical 
section), and Teucrium. 
The small order, Selaginacem, contributed by Professor 
Choisy of Geneva, consists of eight almost exclusively South 
African genera, to which the sub-arctic genus Gymnandra is 
doubtfully appended. Of three Siberian species of this genus 
two are found on our northwest coast, two are Himalayan, 
and one has recently been found at Aucher-Eloy in the mountains 
of Armenia. 
The order Stilbacem, prepared by Professor Alphonse De 
Candolle himself, consists of three genera each of a single 
known species, and of one with five species ; all of them 
natives of the Cape of Good Hope. 
The Globulariacem, by the same author, comprises the 
typical o-enus, with eight species, and a new one of a single 
species ; all of Europe and of Eastern Asia, except one in the 
Canary Islands. 
The order Brunoniacem, also by De Candolle, contains a 
single genus of two Australian species ; both made known by 
the prince of botanists whose name they bear. 
Mr. Boissier, the most active and promising botanist of 
the Genevan school, has elaborated the Plumb aginacem. The 
tribe Staticem comprises six genera, namely, TEgialitis, R. 
Br., of the shores of eastern tropical Asia and Australia ; 
Acantholimon, Boiss., of forty-two Central Asian species, and 
Goniolimon, Boiss., of seven North-Asian species, — both distinguished 
from the following by their capitate instead of 
filiform stigmas : Statice itself, reaching to one hundred and 
ten species ; Armeria, with fifty-two species, and Limoniastrum, 
of two Mediterranean species. The Statice of our own 
coast, S. Caroliniana, Walt., Mr. Boissier distinguishes from 
S. Limonium by its fistulous scape, stricter branches, pj-ramldal 
instead of corymbose panicle, the distant one-flowered 
spikelets, and the very acute calyx-lobes; the Californian 
plant he introduces is a new species. The tribe Plumbagem 
consists of the Siberian Plumbagella, the European and tropical 
Plumbago, the Abyssinian Valoradia, and the African and 
North Indian Vogelia. 
In the Corrigenda to the volume we notice that Bentham 
has corrected the orthography of Trichostemma, so printed 
in the " Genera " of Linnaeus, and by mistake in the 
" Labiatarum Gen. et Sp.," to Trichostema, as written by 
Gronvius, by Linnaeus in the " Hortus Cliffortianus," and as 
the derivation requires. 
This half volume (Pars XIII. , sectio posterior) has appeared 
very nearly at the date announced for it, last autumn, 
when the twelfth was published. It is the second part, anticipating 
the first, which is to contain the Solanacem and the 
Plantaginacece, two families which will finish the Monopetalous 
series, as this begins the Apetalm or Monochlamydem. 
It comprises the Phytolaccacem, Salsolacem {ChenopodeaA) , 
Basellacem, and Amarantacece, elaborated by Moquin-Tandon 
of Toulouse, and the Nyctaginacem, by Professor Choisy of 
Geneva. Of Phytolaccacem we have in the United States, 
only Petivera alliacea, which grows in Florida (probably not 
in " Carolina"), Rivina Imvis (to which we are surprised to 
see R. portulacoides, Nutt., joined), and Phytolacca decandra, 
which last is now so widely dispersed over the world 
that its native country is uncertain. 
The large family of Salsolacem comprises 72 genera, disposed 
nearly as in Tandon's " Chenopodearum Enumeratio," in 
two suborders and seven tribes, most of which are further divided 
into subtribes. Our genera of the Cyclolobcai (those 
with the embryo nearly annular) are Aphanisma, Nutt., a 
Californian plant discovered by Mr. Nuttall ; Teloxys aristata, 
which is credited to us because Linnaeus referred his Cheno- 
podium Virginicum to C. aristatum, but it is doubtful if we 
possess the genus ; Cycloloma {Salsola pdatypjhylla, Michx.) ; 
Cbenopodium, to which Tandon now reunites the greater part 
of his Ambrina ( C. ambrosiodes, C. anthelminticum, etc.), 
leaving in Roubieva only the original species, recently illustrated 
in this Journal by Mr. Carey ; Blitum, to which the 
author now refers, as a section, his former genus, Agathophyton 
{Chenopodium Bonus Henricus, L.) ; Monolepis, Schrad. 
{Blititm chenopodioides, Nutt.) ; Atriplex, of which too many 
of the older species are credited to the United States ; Obione, 
Gaertn., of which nine species are North American, including 
(apparently with sufficient reason) the Pterochiton, Torr., 
Grayia, Hook, and Arm, of a single species ; Eurotia ; a 
doubtful Kochia ; a Corispermum (which Tandon seems not 
to know as also a native of this country) ; Salicornia, in which 
we have S. herbacea ? S. Peruviana (Caro. Fraser), and S. 
Virginica, to which last he evidently would refer S. mucronata, 
Bigelow, a name unknown to him (and he has also 
dropped, apparently by accident, the homonym of Lagasca, so 
that the point in which we are interested is not elucidated) ; Arthrocnemum 
{A.? ambiguum= Salicornia ambigua, Michx.) 
being still kept distinct. Of the Spirolobem we have in 
North America, Chenopodina, a genus newly founded for the 
Ghenopodium maritimum, L., which was formerly referred 
to Suseda, besides which species Tandon also gives us C. linearis, 
Ell., which, however, he thinks may be a variety of C. 
prostrata, which again he thinks may not prove distinct from 
C. maritima, and C. depressa {Sal sola clepressa, Pursh) : 
of Shoberia, we have S. calceoliformis ( Ghenopodium calceoliforme, 
Hook.), which is stated also to be found "near New 
York "; of Salsola, we have S. kali only. The singular genus 
Sarcobatus of Nees (the Fremontia of Torrey in the reports 
of h remont's first and second journeys) is enumerated among 
the Genera exclusa, and said to be " dubiae sedis." Probably 
the author had not seen the figure of the fertile plant 
published by Dr. Torrey. Acnida, following the aspect and 
inflorescence, is here referred to the Amarantacem. 
The order Basellaeem, familiar to us only by the Boussingaultia 
baselloides, which is cultivated as an ornamental 
climbing plant, contains six genera, entirely of tropical 
plants. 
The order Amarantacem includes forty-five genera, arranged 
under three tribes. There arc credited to this country 
: Celosia, one Californian species ; Amaranthus, about 
nine species ; Mengea of Schauer, a Californian species which 
has much the aspect of Amarantus Blitum ; one or more 
species of Euxolus, Raf. {Amarantus lividus, L. etc.) ; 
Acnida, in which A. rusocarpa appears to be mixed up, in a 
manner that requires much investigation to unravel, with 
Amarantus tamariscinus, Nutt., which again, though entirely 
distinct from Acnida itself, nearly accords in character with 
Moquin-Tandon's section Montelia ; Banalia, a new genus, 
one section of which includes an Oregon species Ilalomocnemis 
occidentalis, Nutt., ined.) ; an obscure Polycnemum ; 
Gossypianthus, Hook., two Texan species ; Iresine, two species 
; Alternanthera, one species {Achyranthus repens, L.) ; 
besides the A. (Cladothrix, Nutt.) lanuginosa, which Lindheimer 
and Wright find abundantly in Texas, and which will 
certainly stand as a separate genus, if a striking peculiarity 
in respect to its fruit, observed by Dr. Torrey, proves to be a 
normal condition. Telanthera ficoidea and T. polygonoides 
appear to be only introduced plants along our southern coast. 
Frailichia (Oplotheca, Nutt.) has three North American 
species. Phyllepidium of Rafinesque is not identified and 
probably never will be. 
The remaining family, Nyctaginacem, includes eighteen 
genera, in three tribes. Of Mirablis, though no species are 
credited to us, we have one or more in Texas, as well as the 
three species of Nyctaginia, Choisy. Of Oxybaphus, six 
North American species are indicated ; and the Peruvian 
Alliona incarnata comes also from California. Four species 
of Abonia are described, besides A. ? (Tripterocalyx) micrantha, 
Torr., which Dr. Torrey has since raised to the rank 
of a genus. Pisonia aculeata is found on Key West. Boerhaavia 
furnishes us three or four species ; and there shall remain 
some undescribed Texan representatives of the family. 
The second part of the fourteenth volume of the " Prodromus 
" contains the Thymelmacem by Meisner, the Elmagnacem 
by von Schlechteudal, the Grubbiacem by De Candolle, resting 
merely on one of those outlying or anomalous genera which 
there is too great tendency to raise to ordinal importance, 
merely because the author knows not what to do with them, — 
and Santalacem by De Candolle. Of the first order we have 
only Dirca, peculiar to this country, and with no congener 
known. There is nothing to add respecting our three species 
of Elmagnacem. As to our few Santalacem, it is interesting 
to remark that one of our characteristic genera, Pyrularia 
(the Oilnut), is found to have two representatives in the 
Himalayas (Sphaarocarya, Wall.), and apparently two more 
in southern India (Scleropyrum, Arm). Also that a European 
species is introduced into our Comandra (the 1 hesium 
elcgans of Rochel), and the genus itself shown to be hardly 
distinct from Thesium. And Darbya, Gray, published in 
this Journal twelve years ago, is reduced to a subgenus of 
Comandra, to which we are not disposed to object. But we 
take the new species of true Comandra ( G. pallida) to be 
a mere variety of G. umbellata ; which, by the way, we did 
not state to be eight or ten feet, but only as many inches in 
height. De Candolle thinks that the hairs which connect the 
anthers of Comandra, and of most Thesia also, with the perianth, 
belong to the latter, not to the former, as the generic 
name implies. Our own observations, and especially some 
made by Mr. H. J. Clark upon very young flower-buds, confirm 
this view. The discovery, announced in this Journal in 
1854, that the striking genus Buckleya, Torr., is truly dichlamydeous 
in the female flowers, proves a capital fact for M. 
De Candolle ; who draws from it the confident inference that 
the floral envelope which in all other plants of the order 
occurs alone, and has the stamens opposite its lobes, is corolla 
and not calyx, and consequently so in the Loranthacem and 
Proteacem also. Our author's views are presented in detail in 
an article, " Sur la Famille des Santalaceae," in the " Biblioth^que 
Universelle," published last autumn, and they appear 
wellnigh convincing. An analogous case is found in Zanthoxylum 
(only here the suppression is the rare case), Z. 
Americanum plainly wanting that which in Z. Carolinianum 
is the corolla (" Genera Illustr." 2, p. 148). Nyssa offers a 
good instance of the limb of a calyx so reduced as to have 
escaped notice until four years ago. For what to De Candolle 
seem to be petals (p. 622, note in char, of order SantalacemS), 
were seen to be so, and the observations recorded in the fifth 
volume of the " Memoirs of the American Academy," p. 336, 
and afterwards extended in the " Manual Bot. U. 5.," ed. 2, 
p. 162 (1856). It is singular that De Candolle should remain 
so uncertain of the place of Nyssa in the Natural System. 
If he will compare it and Mastixia with Cornus he will 
surely be convinced that Nyssa is a true Cornaceous genus. 
So of Cevallia, the true place of which our author seems not 
to know, although given in the " Flora of North America " 
many years ago, under the sanction (we may add) of the very 
highest authority. Indeed, so plain is its relationship to 
Gronovia that Fenzl soon saw and corrected his mistake in 
referring the genus to Calycerem. And if at this date any 
should doubt that these are Loasaeeous plants, let them turn 
to the characters of Petalonyx, in the "Memoirs of the 
American Academy," v., p. 319. 
Leaving these details, let us consider our pleasing prospect 
in respect to the continuation (at least through the BicotyledonemP) 
of the great work upon which the De Candolles, 
father and son, and other excellent botanists, have bestowed 
so much labor and talent. The great order of Lauracem was 
to have been included in the present volume. It would have 
extended the volume unduly. But, unfortunately, or fortunately, 
as the case may be, Professor De Vriese has gone to 
Java on a government mission without finishing the work ; 
and the indefatigable Meisner now takes it in hand. It is 
to form the leading part of volume xv., the Begoniacem by 
De Candolle himself, and the Aristolochiacem by Duchartre 
being appended, and perhaps the Euphorbiacem, also by De 
Candolle, except the genus Euphorbia which Boissier undertakes. 
The sixteenth volume is intended to commence with 
the Urticacem proper, by Weddell, or the Monimiacem by 
Tulasne. We are pleased to learn that Professor Anderson 
of Stockholm is to elaborate the Salicinem. 
The other section of the sixteenth volume of De Candolle's 
" Prodromus " has just been issued. The two parts form indeed 
independent volumes, and are paged and indexed as such, 
so that for all time botanists will have to quote B C. Prodr. 
xvi. (I), p., etc., which is to be regretted, but there is no help 
for it. The present (prior) part, of 450 pages besides 65 
intercalated ones, contains the Buxacem and some other jilants 
excluded from the Euphorbiacem, by Dr. Miiller ; the Empetracem 
by Alphonse De Candolle himself (Empetrum reduced 
to one species, Corema of two, and a Ceratiola) ; Cannabinem 
by the same (the Ulmacem and Artocarpem postponed not 
being ready), the Urticacem (i. e. the Urticem) by Weddell ; 
Piperacem by Casimir De Candolle (the Saururem made a 
mere tribe, and the Piperem mainly included under Piper of 
635 species, Peperomia of 389!); Chloranthacem by Solms- 
Laubach of Halle, reduced to three genera ; and finally, Garryacem 
by the editor, comprising nine species of Garrya. It 
appears that the latter end of the volume was printed first, 
which explains the omission of G. buxifolia, a species discovered 
in northern California by Bolander, and published a 
year and a half ago. If one or two collaborators will now 
bring up their arrears, the editor may very soon have the 
great satisfaction of announcing the completion of the great 
Dicotyledonous series. 
The seventeenth volume of De Candolle's "Prodromus" 
contains, in the first place, certain small outlying orders, or 
some of them genera that have to do duty as orders, which 
on various accounts have been left out of the " Prodromus " 
as it went on, namely, Sarraceniacem, Phytocrenem, Cardiopteridem,, 
Salvadoracem, Cynocrambe, Batidacem (one Batis), 
Lennoacem (by Solms-Laubach), Podostemacem (by 
Weddell). Then Nepenthacem, by Dr. Hooker ; Cytinacem, 
by the same ; Balanophoracem, by Eichler ; Clmacem, by 
Planchon ; Moraccm-, by Bureau ; and a synopsis of the genera 
of Artocarpem. For the complete elaboration of the last 
family the volume has been a good while kept back, and has 
at length been issued, and (sad to say) the work concluded 
without it. It is to be hoped that whenever M. Bureau 
finishes his undertaking, the publishers of the " Prodromus " 
may print the Artocarpem uniformly with the rest, so that it 
may be appended. 
Then follow a few pages of Genera omissa, with brief 
references, indicating that they are, or may be, so far as has 
been made out or conjectured ; and finally, the wearied editor 
appends his " Prodromi Historia, Numeri, Conclusio." It is 
a terse and highly interesting account of this work, which 
(including the two preceding volumes of " Systema") occupied 
his celebrated and indefatigable father from the year 1816, or 
earlier, down to the end of his life, in 1841, and himself to 
the close of the past year ; an enumeration of the contributors 
who have worked up particular families or genera ; an enumeration 
of the orders, specifying the volume which contains 
each, and the number of genera and species described, 5134 
genera and 58,975 species, which the missing Artocarpem, 
it is estimated, would bring up to 5163 genera and about 
60,000 species of Dicotyledon es. Among a few statistical 
data which are given, the ten orders are enumerated which 
contain the greatest number of genera, beginning with Compositm 
and ending with Cruciferm. Then the ten which 
most abound in species, which begin with Compositm, (8561 
species) and end with Umbelliferm (1016). Leguminosem 
are the second in both lists, and next Rubiacem in the former 
and Euphorbiacem in the latter. But the long interval between 
the publication of many orders, say between Cruciferm 
and Euphorbiacem, much diminishes the value of such comparisons. 
The reasons which have prevented a more rapid 
publication of the volumes of the " Prodromus," especially 
since the work has been largely distributed among collaborators, 
are hinted at ; and finally the regrettable announcement 
is made that the publication is now relinquished, at the close 
of the Dicotyledones. A full Index, down to genera and 
their sections, filling 170 pages, closes this great work. 
We sincerely congratulate the editor upon the successful 
completion of this great undertaking at the limits he felt 
obliged to prescribe, and thank him heartily for his long and 
faithful service and many sacrifices. As it may be hoped that 
he has still years of good work in him, all will regret that he 
could not bear this burden through a few of them while a 
half dozen collaborators, who might be named, elaborate the 
Monocotyledonous orders. But, as he declares that he should 
doubtless perish under it, we prefer the living botanist to the 
completed " Prodromus." We may expect from him orio-i-nal 
work instead of editorial drudgery, perhaps a new edition 
of his Geographical Botany, or new researches upon the 
same subject, investigated with his impartial judgment, under 
the new light which was just dawning when that comprehensive 
treatise was published. 
Since these remarks were written we have received an interesting 
pamphlet, separately issued from the " Archives des 
Sciences " of the " Bibliotheque Universelle " for November, 
entitled, " Reflexions sur les Ouvrages Generaux de Botanique 
Descriptive." In this M. De Candolle gives the history 
of the "Prodromus" and its forerunner with considerable 
fullness, explains more particularly his editorial trials 
and burdens, and the reasons why the work could not be 
made to get on faster, and gives his views as to the most 
practicable method of combining the labors of the botanist 
of another generation in the production of the new " Systema 
Veo-etabilium " which will be demanded. An estimate is made 
of the time it must needs require, even with all the available 
monographers of the day enlisted in the service. The increased 
difficulties, or at least the augmented labor, of systematic 
botanical work, under the present demands of the 
science, are indicated. It appears that while in his father's 
time one could elaborate at the rate of about ten species a 
day, a faithful monographer now, under the modern requirements, 
can seldom exceed three or four hundred species per 
annum, that is, about a species a day! We suppose that the 
case on the whole is not overstated. 
ENDLICHER'S GENERA PLANTARUM. 
Tins is one of the most iniDortant works x of the a<re : and 
we are anxious to make it more generally known to the botanists 
of this country. It is not too much to say, that without 
this, and Lindley's introduction to the Natural System (or 
some equivalent work), no person who does not possess the 
advantage of a large library and an extensive general collection 
of plants, can obtain any correct idea of the present state 
of systematic botany. The work is published in parts, of 
eighty pages each, in an imperial octavo or a kind of oblong 
quarto form, closely printed in double columns. The eleventh 
fasciculus, which is the last we have received, reaches to pao-e 
880 ; but probably two or more additional numbers have by 
1 Endlicher's Genera Plantarum secundum Ordines Naturales disposita. 
Vienna, 1836-40. (American Journal of Science and Arts, xxxix. 176.) 
this time appeared. It is stated in the original announcement 
that the work will not exceed ten or twelve numbers ; we 
imagine, however, that four or five additional numbers will bo 
required for its completion. It commences, like the " Genera 
Plantarum " of Jussieu, with the plants of the simplest or 
lowest organization (Thallophyta, Endl.) ; a plan which is 
now the most common and perhaps the most philosophical, 
but which is attended with many practical inconveniences to 
the tyro. 
The first edition of the " Genera Plantarum " by Linnaeus 
was published at Leyden in the year 1737 ; the second and 
third were published at the same place, the one in 1742, the 
other in 1752 ; the fourth and fifth were published at Stockholm 
; the latter (termed the sixth in our copy) in the year 
1764, which is the last by Linnasus himself, is the edition generally 
cited, and was reprinted at Vienna in 1767. This last 
Stockholm edition forms the excellent model of all the succeeding 
editions, as they are termed, edited by various authors. 
It comprises 1239 genera, which in an appendix are 
reduced as far as possible to their proper natural orders. The 
first edition after the death of Linnaeus is, we believe, that of 
Reichard, published at Frankfort in 1778, about the same 
time with the edition of the " Systema Plantarum " by the 
same author. To this succeeded the edition by Schreber 
(published also at Frankfort, 1789-1791, in two volumes), 
who is chiefly famous for having in this work changed all the 
unclassical names of Aublet and others for new ones made 
according to the Linnaean canons. Succeeding authors in 
plucking these borrowed plumes have despoiled him of some 
rightful feathers ; as in the case of the genus Brasenia, for 
which most botanists have retained Michaux's name, Hydropeltis, 
which was published a dozen years later. The number 
of genera is here increased to 1769. About the same time 
(1791) an edition was published by Haenke at Vienna, which 
is apparently carefully digested. The latest edition of the 
" Genera Plantarum " which bears the name of Linnaeus, and is 
arranged according to the artificial system, is that of Sprengel, 
and published at Gottingen in 1830 and 1831 (2 vols. 8vo), 
which is the latest complete work in which the known genera 
are characterized. He gives the date of the publication of 
each genus, and references to the principal figures. The whole 
number of the genera described is 4159. 
The " Genera Plantarum secundum Ordines N a f ura l es disposita 
" of the immortal Jussieu, with which a new era in botany 
commenced, appeared in the year 1789. This work has 
never been reprinted in France, and but once out of it, and is 
now very scarce. Until the commencement of Dr. Endlicher's 
work, a period of about half a century, it has remained the 
only Genera Plantarum according to the natural system. 
There is but one living botanist upon whom the task of preparing 
a new Genera of Plants would seem most appropriately 
to devolve ; but since it cannot be expected from that quar- 
ter, we are glad it has been undertaken, and we may almost 
say completed, by so learned and careful a botanist as Dr. 
Endlicher. The only fault we have to notice is, that there 
is no mode of distinguishing directly the generic characters, 
which are compiled altogether from preceding authors, from 
those drawn from the plants themselves. An author can only 
be considered responsible for the latter ; yet unless there be 
some means of distinguishing those which have been verified 
from the remainder, he becomes somewhat implicated in the 
mistakes of his predecessors. Dr. Endlicher being scarcely 
less distinguished as a classical scholar than as a botanist, this 
work is a perfect model of the classical style. 
Simultaneously with this work, which it is in part intended 
to illustrate, the author is publishing an " Iconographia Generum 
Plantarum." It appears in quarto parts, with about 
twelve uncolored plates in each, executed in a very superior 
manner, with full analyses, which leave nothing to be desired 
in this respect. Seven or eight parts are already published. 
It is the cheapest illustrated work of the kind with which we 
are acquainted, and at the same time one of the very best. 
HARVEY'S SOUTH AFRICAN PLANTS. 
This volume 1 was written, printed in very handsome style, 
and published at the Cape of Good Hope. It was prepared, 
not, as we might suppose, for the purpose of making Cape 
plants better known to European botanists, but for the use of 
the students and lovers of flowers at the Cape. It is arranged, 
moreover, according to the Natural System, and is throughout 
a work of genuine science. Truly, if popular botanical works, 
based on the Natural System, are deemed most advantageous 
for students at the Cape of Good Hope, we may indulge the 
expectation that this method will in due time be universally 
adopted in Europe and the United States. Mr. Harvey, who, 
while occupied with his duties as colonial secretary, has been 
enabled to do so much for the botany of that rich and interesting 
region, both by his- own researches and by encouraging 
the labors of others, was requested to recommend some introductory 
work on botany. 
Had a mere introduction to the elements of the science alone 
been needed, the desideratum might easily have been supplied. 
" But I soon found," says Mr. Harvey, " on cross-questioning, 
that something very different was required. One lady told 
me that she knew already what ' calyx, corolla, stamens, and 
pistils, and all that ' meant ; and another had penetrated the 
mystery of Monandria, Diandria, etc., and did not want to be 
told that over again ; what they desired was a book in which 
they could discover the names of every plant that struck their 
fancy in rambling through the fields, — in short, a Flora 
Capensis. Here I found myself completely at fault, for there 
seemed little use in recommending the Flora of Thunberg, or 
the more ancient writings of Burmann ; for even could they 
be procured, which would not be without much difficulty, they 
would have proved perfectly useless to my lady friends, who, 
not being blue-stockings, could have derived little instruction 
1 The Genera of South African Plants, arranged according to the natural 
system, by William Henry Harvey, Esq. Cape Town, 1838. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, xxxix. 173.) 
from the crabbed Latin in which they were written." Mr. 
Harvey then conceived the idea of writing a Flora Capensis ; 
but it at once occurring that such a work must consume a 
long series of years in preparation, he decided upon rendering 
that more prompt, though less complete assistance, which a 
work like the present is calculated to afford. " The Genera 
of South African Plants " is the result of this determination ; 
for which the author deserves the thanks, not only of the lady 
friends whose benefit he had chiefly in view, but of all the 
cultivators of botanical science. Although much more time 
would be required for its preparation, the work would have 
been more valuable had Mr. Harvey placed still 'less dependence 
on preceding authors, and drawn his characters, in 
every practicable instance, from the plants themselves ; but 
only those who are accustomed to prepare their works in this 
manner are aware of the vast amount of labor it involves. 
The general plan of the work, as the author informs us, is 
taken from Beck's "Botany of the Northern and Middle 
States of North America," and Nuttall's " Genera of North 
American Plants " ; in the arrangement and characters of the 
orders, Dr. Arnott has chiefly been followed. The number 
of genera described is 1086, distributed under 135 orders. 
Many South African genera have been published in still more 
recent general works or particular memoirs, or in those which 
have not reached the Cape in time to be employed by Mr. 
Harvey, so that the number of Cape genera may be safely 
estimated at 1200. 
SIEBOLD'S FLORA OF JAPAN. 
This work 1 is, we believe, wholly arranged and prepared 
by Professor Zuccarini of Munich, from notes and specimens 
furnished by Dr. Siebold of Leyden, accumulated during his 
1 Flora Japonica, Sectio prima, Planta? ornatui vel usui inservientes 
digessit Dr. J. G. Zuccarini. Fasc. 1-10. Leyden, 1835-39. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, xxxix. 175.) 
long official residence in Japan. The admirable plates are 
executed in Munich : they are engraved upon stone after a 
peculiar method, which is now frequently employed, and are 
certainly not excelled in beauty or accuracy by any copperplate 
engraving in the same style. The portion already published 
comprises only the ornamental or otherwise interesting 
plants, the general account of the Japanese floi-a being reserved 
for a future part of the work. The flora of Japan presents 
such striking analogies to that of the temperate part of 
North America as to render this work of more than ordinary 
interest to American botanists. To show this, we select from 
the forty-six species described and figured by Zuccarini, the 
following list, placing opposite the Japanese plant the related 
North American forms. 
FLORA OF JAPAN. 
Illicium religiosum, 
Kadsura Japonica, 
Benthamia Japonica, 
Corylopsis, two species, 
A ralia edulis, 
Symplocos lucida, 
Styrax Japonicum, etc. 
Deutzia, three species, 
Schizophargma Hydrangeoides, ) 
Platycrater arguta, j 
Diervilla, several species, 
Viburnum tomentosum, 
Wisteria (or, as it should be, ) 
Wistaria) Japonica, and two 2 
other species, ) 
Paulownia imperials, 
FLORA OF NORTH AMERICA. 
Illicium Floridanum and parviflorum.. 
Schizandra coccinea. 
Cornus florida. 
Hamamelis and Frothergilla. 
Aralia racemosa. 
Hopea tinctoria. 
Styrax, several species. 
Philadelphus. 
[ Decumaria and 
i Hydrangea. 
Diervilla Tournefortii. 
Viburnum lantanoides. 
Wistaria frutescens. 
Catalpa cordifolia. 
While about half the species thus far published are nearly 
related to (chiefly characteristic) North American plants, only 
eight, besides those given above, belong to genera which have 
no representatives in this country. The list might be greatly 
extended by comparisons from other sources. Thus Iloteia 
Japonica of Morren and Decaisne (which belongs to the earlier 
established Astilbe, Don.), which was by Thunberg mistaken 
for Spirma Aruncus, closely resembles our own Astilbe 
decandra, which has been more than once confounded with 
Spirma Aruncus. On some future occasion we hope to make 
a somewhat extended comparison between the flora of temperate 
North America, and that of Japan and Middle Asia. 1 
Professor Zuccarini, the author, in conjunction with Dr. Siebold, 
of the excellent " Flora Japonica " now in progress, has 
recently published the first part of a brief memoir, entitled, 
" Florae Japonicae familiae Naturales, adjectis generum et specierum 
exemplis selectis : Sect. i. Plantse dicotyledoneae polypetalas." 
2 It is interesting to remark how many of our characteristic 
genera are reproduced in Japan, not to speak of 
striking analogous forms. Thus the flora of Japan has not 
only Wistaria, Lespedeza, Sieversia, Chimonanthus (in place 
of our Calycanthus), Philadelphus, several species of Rhus 
closely resembling our own, and two peculiar genera of Juglandem, 
but also a Pachysandra, some Berchemias, a Staphylea, 
and a peculiar genus of the tribe (Euscaphis) besides ; 
not only a dozen Maples, but also a Negundo, a Stuartia, two 
Tibas, a Phytolacca, an Opuntia (surely not indigenous), a 
Sicyos referred to our own S. angulata, two Droseras, a 
Nelumbium, a Nuphar, and two species of Nymphaea, Gynandropsis, 
a real Dicentra (Dielytra) and an allied now genus, 
with several species of Corydalis, a Trollius, our own Coptis 
and two new ones like the western C. asplenifolia, an Isopyrum, 
two species of Aquilegia, one of them near A. Canadensis, 
a Cimicifuga, a Trautvetteria, an Illicium, some 
Magnolias, Kadsura and Sphaerostemma in place of Schizandra, 
a Mitellopsis, two species of Astilbe (Hoteia), many 
Hydrangeas as well as peculiar Hydrangeaceous forms, a 
Hamamelis with two other characteristic genera of the family, 
some true Dogwoods, as well as Benthamia the analogue of 
our Cornus florida, some true Vines, and two species of Am- 
1 This short p.iper is of peculiar interest. It contains the earliest record 
of Professor Gray's investigations into the flora of Japan, and its relations 
to that of eastern North America — investigations which many years later 
enabled him to explain the distribution of plants through the northern 
hemisphere by tracing their direct descent from ancestors which flourished 
in the Arctic region during the latest tertiary periods, and established 
his reputation as a philosophical naturalist. — C. S. S. 
American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., ii. 135. 
pelopsis, three species of Panax, and four of Aralia, one of 
which is near our A. nudicaulis ; and among Umbelliferae 
are Hydrocotyle, Sanicula, Sium, Angelica, but what is most 
remarkable, Cryptotaenia, Archemora, and Osmorhiza. Further 
eases of generic conformity abound in the remaining divisions 
of the vegetable kingdom; thus, for example, Diervilla, 
Mitchella, Madura, Liquidambar, Torreya, and Sassafras, 
are represented in the flora of Japan. 
VEGETABLE MONSTROSITIES. 
This interesting treatise 1 on Vegetable Monstrosities is 
very properly prefaced by a statement of whait is meant by 
the normal structure of plants, by vegetable individuality, 
and vegetable symmetry. The author proceeds to consider, 
first, those slighter deviations which are called varieties ; 
and secondly, those more grave and mostly congenital anomalies 
which bear the name of monsters. As to the latter the 
author remarks, that nearly every monstrous or abnormal condition 
that has been observed is to be met with as the normal 
state of other vegetables ; and that between a monstrous and 
a normal flower, the only difference often is, that the former 
is the occasional, and the latter the habitual state. "La 
monstruosite est done, en general, l'application insolite, a un 
individu on a un appareil, de la structure normale d'un autre 
appareil ou d'un autre individu. C'est un organisation transposed, 
c'est une loi changee de place. On l'a dit avec raison, 
la monstruosite ne se trouve pas en dehors de la nature, mais 
seulement en dehors de la coutume." It is clear, therefore, 
that while abnormal states may always be explained by the 
laws which regulate the normal structure, monsters themselves, 
as the etymology of the name indicates, often show us the true 
structure when it could not be certainly inferred from the 
1 Elemens de Teratologic Ve'gelale, ou Histoire abrege'e des anomalies de 
V Organisation dans les Vcgetaux. Par A. Moquin-Tandon. Paris, 1841. 
(American Journal of Science and Arts, xli. 374.) 
habitual condition. The author arranges monstrosities under 
four primary classes : those of volume, of form, of disposition, 
and of number. These are divided, the first class into monsters 
by diminution of volume {Atrophy), and by augmentation 
{Hypertrophy) ; the second class into monsters by alteration 
of form, whether irregular {Bifformation) or regular 
{Pelorias), and monsters by the transformation of one organ 
into another {Metamorphosis') ; the third class into monsters 
by the abnormal connection of parts, or by the disunion of 
parts habitually united, and into those caused by change of 
situation, or displacement ; the fourth class into monsters by 
diminution of number, or abortion, and those by augmentation 
of number. Under these heads the monstrosities of the different 
organs of plants are considered in detail, and in a philosophical 
and very interesting manner. This brief notice 
of the plan of Moquin-Tandon's work, we are confident, will 
suffice to commend it to the attention of the botanists of this 
country. 
AGASSIZ'S ZOÖLOGICAL NOMENCLATOR. 
This great work, 1 which must have cost an extraordinary 
amount of labor, is now almost completed. Trusting that some 
one of our able zoologists will duly give an account of a work 
which is indispensable to every votary of their science, we propose 
at this time merely to call attention to the preface, published 
last year with the ninth and tenth fasciculi, and to express 
unqualified admiration of the manner in which a subject 
of interest to all naturalists, that of nomenclature, is there 
treated. While botanists are enjoying the benefits of a sedulous 
adherence to the wholesome rules imposed by the father of 
natural-history nomenclature, and of nearly unanimous agreement 
in the few changes which the progress of science and the 
multiplication of its objects have rendered needful, the zoolo- 
1 Nomenclator Zoblogicus, continens Nomina Systematica Generum Animalium, 
tarn viventium quam fossilium, etc. Auctore, L. Agassiz. Soleure, 
1842-46. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., iii. 302.) 
gists on the other hand, who have too generally allowed every 
one to do that which was right in his own eyes, are reaping 
in consequence a plentiful harvest of confusion. The difficulty 
of a reform increases with its necessity. It is much 
easier to state the evils than to relieve them ; and the wellmeant 
endeavors that have recently been made to this end are 
some of them likely, if adopted, to make " confusion worse 
confounded." Probably no living zoologist is so conversant 
as Professor Agassiz with the actual state of the nomenclature 
of the animal kingdom, and so well qualified to judge of the 
practical working of proposed rules, which often involve consequences 
that the propounders never dreamed of. Our 
author's views are therefore entitled to great weight. We are 
glad to perceive that they entirely concur with those quite 
unanimously adopted in the other great department of natural 
history for which the Linnaean canons were originally framed. 
As these canons were the foundations of our nomenclature, 
Professor Agassiz has very properly reproduced them, totidem 
verbis, from the " Philosophia Botanica," adding now and 
then a short but pithy commentary. He then proceeds to 
examine the rules proposed by the Committee of the British 
Association, and shows that while some of them are mere iterations 
of the Linnaean canons, which should never have lost 
their authority, others are contrary to them, or threaten greater 
evils than they are intended to remedy. In most respects his 
criticisms concur with those already made by Dr. Gould in a 
former volume of this Journal (XIV. p. 1). We ao-ree with 
Professor Agassiz in thinking these English canons worthy of 
adoption only when they agree with the letter or spirit of the 
Linnaean rules, which indeed they generally do. Those which 
conflict with them have not received, and probably will not 
receive, the general assent even of British naturalists. Hence, 
in our opinion, the American Geological Association has too 
hastily reaffirmed them, while they have, indeed, improved 
their form in several respects. It may be well to notice the 
comments of Professor Agassiz upon the more objectionable 
propositions. 
Their first rule, " that the name given by the founder of a 
group or the (first) describer of a species should be permanently 
retained," cannot be too firmly insisted on ; for upon 
it rests the stability which is the most essential requisite of 
nomenclature. Their second rule, that since " the binomial 
nomenclature originated with Linnaeus, the law of priority is 
not to extend to the writings of antecedent authors," restricts 
the former too arbitrarily, and conflicts, as Professor Agassiz 
states, both with the canons and the example of Linnaeus, not 
less than with the conscientious practice of good naturalists 
ever since. Linnaeus was not the founder of genera or of 
generic nomenclature, and, " far from making new names in 
every instance, he retained all names given by his predecessors, 
provided they could be received into his system." It is 
generally thought that Linnaeus erred by adopting, not too 
many, but too few of the unobjectionable and well-established 
generic names of his predecessors, such as Tournefort, etc. 
Now when, in the natural progress of the science, a Linnaean 
genus is resolved into two or more Tournefortian ones, for 
instance, are the names of Tournefort to be excluded from 
use ? In the breaking up of the Linnaean genus Lonicera, 
had not the Diervilla and Xylosteum (and if the division 
were to go farther, the Periclymenum and Caprifolium) of 
Tournefort, as well as the Symphoricarpos of Dillenius, an 
indisputable right to restoration ? Indeed Linnaeus was here 
plainly wrong in not adopting one of these prior names for 
the whole genus, instead of creating the new one. This, however, 
was to be submitted to ; for, as Professor Agassiz remarks, 
" the names sanctioned by Linnaeus are to be held as 
established above all others. Linnaeus, for instance, received 
very few genera of Echinodermata. Nowadays this class 
numbers many, among which some of those founded by Klein, 
Link and Breynius, long anterior to Linnaeus, hold their place 
with the modern ones of Lamarck, Miiller, etc. But no one 
now prefers that new names should be made for such genera, 
rather than that such approved anterior ones should be 
brought into use again. I certainly see no cause why we may 
not call to life the names of former authors when we divide 
the genera of Linnaeus." We think those naturalists blame- 
worthy who do not. The third, fourth, and fifth of the 
British canons are accordant with Linnaean rules, and are 
regularly followed in botany. The next four relate to matters 
which follow as a consequence of the law of priority ; 
but as to what relates to the use of synonymous names Professor 
Agassiz intimates that their rule is perhaps too absolute, 
and even contradictory to the Linnaean canon, § 244 : 
"Nomina generica, quamdiu synonyma digna in promptu 
sunt, nova non effingenda." 
The tenth rule, namely, " A name should be changed 
which has before been proposed for some other genus in 
zoology or botany, or for some other species in the same 
genus, when still retained for such genus or species," is not as 
well worded as the equivalent Linnaean canon, § 217, " Nomen 
genericum unum idemque ad diversa designanda genera assumptum, 
altero loco, excludendum erit." Mr. Agassiz remarks, 
greatly to our surprise, that the enforcement of this 
rule would demand the sacrifice of almost half the generic 
names made in recent times. In our opinion, while the same 
names ought not to be given both in zoology and botany, 
the time is passed when received names are to be changed on 
this account. While writers in the different departments of 
zoology alone have doubly employed the same name "in ten 
thousand instances," we must see that cases of this sort between 
zoologists and botanists, occupying such widely separated 
fields, are inevitable, at least until as perfect lists of 
zoological names shall be compiled and kept up as is done in 
botany. Besides, it is now utterly impossible for any single 
naturalist, or any joint committee of botanists and zooloo-ists, 
to determine, in half the cases that arise, whether a particular 
genus is to be suppressed or retained in one department, 
so as to require or forbid a change of the posterior 
homonymous name in the other ; hence the practical application 
of the Linnaean rule would now create tenfold more confusion 
than it can relieve. Each well-founded change of the 
sort does no more than obviate a possible inconvenience, 
while every needless one, in a genus of numerous species, 
draws after it a load of useless synonyms, which do not 
serve, like genuine synonyms, to tell the history of the genus 
and mark the progress of our knowledge. The whole subject 
is forcibly presented by Professor Agassiz, in another section 
of his preface (p. xxviii et seq.), where he states that he now 
knows three thousand generic names common to botany and 
zoology, which the Linnaean rule would require to be changed 
in one or the other department. But surely this number must 
comprise a host of synonyms long since laid on the shelf, as 
well as names of somewhat different formation or termination, 
although of the same derivation. In this case a small matter 
should give them impunity. If these changes must be made, 
no one could do the work for zoology better than Mr. Agassiz ; 
but he affirms it to be a task quite beyond his power, and 
justly concludes that, "in the present state of the science, 
generic names ought not to be changed solely on account 
of their being employed in both kingdoms of nature." To 
this conclusion the American Association evidently accede. 
As to generic names doubly or triply employed in the several 
classes of the animal kingdom (which, we are astonished 
to learn, already number nearly ten thousand), the necessity 
of applying the Linnaean canon is obvious, and would 
be imperative had not the evil reached such a height as^ to 
baffle remedy. The summum jus which demands the immediate 
change of nearly a moiety of the received zoological 
names would surely become gumma injuria to the science, 
even if any naturalist were equal to the task of applying it. 
Justice must here be delayed in order that it may be rightly 
administered, and, as our author recommends, the business of 
gradually bringing this part of nomenclature under rule must 
be left to monographers and future systematists. But let 
those upon whom the cacoethes nominandi is strong, obey 
our author's advice, desist from proposing new names in mere 
catalogues, and never attempt, while revising the genus which 
rightfully claims a particular name, to impose new names 
upon the homonymous genera in other classes, but leave that 
for their own respective monographers. It will be soon 
enough to give them new names, if such are needed, when 
the validity of these several genera is well made out. 
Upon the 11th rule of the British Committee, namely, that 
" a name may be changed when it implies a false proposition 
which is likely to propagate important errors," Professor 
Agassiz remarks that the less this liberty is used the better, 
lest it should lead to licentiousness. 
The 12th rule ordains that " a name which has never been 
clearly defined in some published work should be changed for 
the earliest by which the object shall have been so defined." 
This law, our author remarks, " has become very necessary, 
since dealers in natural objects have begun to arrogate the 
authorship of books collected from catalogues, and demand 
that authors shall receive their names for dividing species. It 
is the same with names which remain unpublished in public 
or private collections, and to which the proprietors or curators 
sometimes lay claim. But priority is to be conceded 
only to publication in a work which is accessible to the learned 
throughout the world. Yet while we strictly press the observance 
of this law in respect to the publication by learned men 
of the results of their observations, so much the more must 
we brand with infamy those impudent parasites who prowl 
about museums to pick materials for their opttscula, without 
mentioning the sources whence they have derived their spoil, 
and sometimes even furtively describing the species, the 
names of which they claim." The people alluded to well deserve 
this censure. On the other hand, not less blameworthy 
are those who purposely pass by, instead of courteously adopting, 
appropriate names under which naturalists often distribute 
their species in advance of publication. This felony is 
the more atrocious because remediless, and to be prevented 
by no rule except that of courtesy ; for the public good requires 
that priority should be conceded to actual publication 
alone. 
The two remaining laws (13th and 14th) are agreeable to, 
or identical with, Linnaean canons, and are approved by all 
good naturalists. 
The rules recommended by the British Committee for the 
future improvement of nomenclature are next considered ; 
and as they are far the most commendable and in general use 
among good naturalists, we shall only notice those that Mr. 
Agassiz criticises, or we have occasion to comment upon. The 
writer of the British Report has chosen to enforce the direction, 
to avoid harsh and inelegant or sesquipedalian names, by 
citing, as an example of the kind, the " Enaliolimnosaurus 
crocodilocephaloides of a German naturalist ; " for which he 
is strongly censured by our author, who declares that no naturalist 
has ever proposed this name. Surely, if one is inclined 
"to cast stones into his neighbor's garden," as our author 
says, there is no lack of legitimate opportunity, nor necessity 
for fabricating hard names. 
The British Committee condemns the future employment 
of generic names which have been superseded by the rule of 
priority. But this is contrary to the canon, § 245 — " Nomen 
genericum unius generis, nisi supervacaneum, in aliud transferri 
non debet " (and to obs. under § 244), no less than to 
the practice of Linnaeus and of subsequent naturalists. For 
instance, Saururus of Plunder became a synonym of Piper, but 
this did not debar Linnaeus from the subsequent application 
of the name to a new genus. Sisyrinchium of Tournefort 
being included in Iris, Linnaeus gave the name to a different 
genus ; nor did he hesitate to adopt the genus which Ellis 
had dedicated to Hales, on account of an earlier Halesia of 
Browne, which had already sunk to a synonym. Why should 
a good name be forever tabooed in such cases, and why not, 
if occasion offers, allow it to be remarried to a new genus ? 
W e should be careful, however, not to reproduce names which 
are likely ever to be resuscitated in their former relation. 
The British Committee objects to the practice of giving to 
a genus the name which it bore as a species of a former 
genus. But, as Professor Agassiz justly remarks, when a 
species, which proves to be the type of a new genus, has a 
good proper name already, it seems quite as admissible to 
take that name for the genus and make a new one for the 
species, as to coin a new generic name, since either way a new 
name must be introduced: indeed it is preferable, because 
such Linnaean species frequently are found to comprise several, 
hitherto confounded, no one of which has a paramount 
claim to the specific name : e. g. Cyprinus Gobio, C. Leuciscus, 
C. Barbus, L. We go further, and maintain that the 
proper specific names are, cmteribus paribus, always to be preferred 
for genera in these cases, not only because that they 
are already familiar, but because they are most frequently 
old generic names which may claim under the law of priority. 
For example, Bonicera Diervilla, L. = Diervilla, Tourn. ; L. 
Symphoricarpos, L. = Symphoricarpos, Dill. ; Rhamnus Paliurus, 
\i. = Paliurus, Dod.; R. Zizyphus, L.= Zizyphus, 
Dod. ; Rubus Dalibarda, L. = Dalibarda, L. ; and so of hundreds 
of proper specific names which have rightly resumed 
their generic rank. 
The next proposition of the British Committee, namely, that 
specific names, even when substantive or borrowed from persons 
or places, should uniformly be written with a small (instead 
of capital) initial, is so contrary to long usage and 
offensive to good taste, that we are surprised that it should 
anywhere find favor. Mr. Agassiz pointedly condemns it. 
The only reason assigned for the change is, that some people 
might not be able to distinguish the specific from the generic 
name without the aid of typography. But, as Dr. Gould has 
already remarked in this Journal, such persons would be 
misled by almost anything ; and the propounders of the rule 
should follow it consistently by writing their own cognomen 
with a small initial letter. We do not wonder that the Committee 
of the American Association refused to reaffirm this 
rule, as applied to proper names from persons ; and we are 
quite sure that naturalists generally will not hesitate wholly 
to reject it ; surely the committee would not approve the practice 
of a late botanical author of this country, who reduced 
the proper scientific names of Linnaeus into adjective conformity, 
by writing " Ranunculus flammulus," instead of R. 
Flammula, " Thymus serpyllus " in the place of Thymus 
Serpyllum, and so on. 
Professor Agassiz severely condemns the proposition to restrict 
the names of families to a uniform termination in idm, 
and their subdivisions to inm, without considering whether the 
words in question will receive that particular suffix kindly. 
This is quite too straight-laced, and gives rise to many 
awkward forms, or 
" Sesquipedalia verba 
Vel nocitura sono, guttur lfesura loquentis," 
which is not worth while to encounter needlessly, for the sake 
of mere technical uniformity, at least when they may be 
avoided by some liberty of choice in the mode of prolongation. 

The proposition, D. of the British Committee, which directs 
that the name of the original propounder of a species should 
adhere to it when transferred to a different genus, is warmly 
defended by some naturalists in England and, in a modified 
form, in our own country also. Few naturalists are now so 
well qualified to judge of the practical operation of this 
scheme as Professor Agassiz. He declares his opinion that, if 
received, "it will introduce horrible and remediless confusion," 
and that no possible multiplication of synonymy is 
likely to lead to so many difficulties as this new practice. He 
therefore strenuously opposes it by arguments drawn from the 
precepts and practice of Linnaeus, who meant the specific 
name to be subordinate to the generic, and never intended it 
to be inferred that he who applied to a plant or animal a 
certain name was therefore its discoverer, or even its first 
systematic describer. He affirms that Linnaeus would have 
expressly rejected " Tyrannus crinitus, Linn, {sp.)," were 
the innovation proposed in his day, and have written T. crinitus, 
Swains., had he thought best to approve the division of 
his genus Muscicapa. On the other hand, if he disapproved 
the division, we may add, he would not have thanked a contemporary 
for making him seem to adopt it. The hardship 
is still greater when the question is not of the division of an 
old genus, but of the proper place of a species among admitted 
genera, when it is surely improper to cite an author as 
referring to one genus, while he expressly maintains that it 
belongs to another. In fact, the remedy is much worse than 
the disease which the English doctors would cure. Linnaeus 
maintains that he is the true naturalist who understands 
genera ; but from the new practice it will inevitably follow, 
as Professor Agassiz asserts, that the proper establishment 
and definition of genera which demand the highest powers 
of the naturalist, will be less esteemed than the mere distinguishing 
of species ; a result which, far from promoting 
science, will especially retard the progress of that part of 
zoology in which there is most to be done, and in which the 
science of the animal is still far behind that of the vegetable 
kingdom. It is of the greatest importance that we should 
be able to thread our way back through entangled synonymy 
and mistaken references to the original sources. Here our 
difficulties would be greatly multiplied, unless two sorts of 
synonyms are used. For who, as Mr. Agassiz says, can find 
out what Linnaeus has said of Muscicapa crinita, without a 
direct reference to the genus in which Linnaeus himself placed 
it ? And when, as often happens, the Linnaean species is 
mistaken, so that the Tyrannus crinitus, Linn, {sp.) according 
to Swainson, is not the T. crinitus, Linn, {sp.) according 
to some other author, the confusion becomes inextricable, 
unless we encumber ourselves with two modes of annotation, 
the old for expressing synonymy, and the new for the names 
really adopted. " Then the two modes will not agree with 
each other, nor can one know whither to turn himself. Surely 
the authors of this new rule cannot have considered these 
inconveniences, else they would have themselves discarded 
it. Therefore I entreat and pray them, by all the interests 
of the science they wish to promote, to abandon their proposition, 
and not to introduce a new schism into natural history, 
but to return again to the system of Linnaeus, the most simple 
of all, and the least likely to errors and Babylonish confusion 
in nomenclature." 
The Committee of the American Association more wisely 
adopted the mode, afterwards employed by Mr. Dana in 
his great work on Zoophytes, namely, that of appending to 
the specific name the original authority for the species in 
brackets, and adding without brackets the name of the author 
who first described the species under the later received 
genus. To this plan there can be no objection, except that 
it is rather cumbrous, if it is to be used in every brief 
mention of the species, and, in our opinion, quite superfluous 
in a systematic treatise, where the synonymy is given in 
proper historical order. The recommendation to make subgeneric 
names agree in gender with that of the genus, Professor 
Agassiz thinks is of no consequence, unless the new 
annotation, just animadverted upon, should come into use. 
Besides, it would often interfere with the rule of priority, 
which requires synonyms, when they exist, to be adopted for 
sectional names. But he strongly commends the rule, that 
the etymology of names should always be stated by the proposer. 

Justly does Mr. Agassiz condemn the practice of those who 
change the authority of a genus when they extend or narrow 
its bounds, or correct a faulty orthography. Thus he would 
write Lepidosteus, Lacep., although Lacepede wrote Lepisosteus; 
and especially would he write Perca, Linn. (Cuv.), 
not Perca, Cuv. 
Hearty and just, also, is his censure of the custom of those 
French zoologists who use vernacular appellations in scientific 
works, either to the exclusion of the systematic name, or 
in precedence of it. 
Our author closes this part of his preface with some excellent 
reflections on the study of genera in the animal kingdom, 
and the need of a thorough reinvestigation of the 
grounds upon which natural families are constituted; remarks 
which we would gladly copy, if our limits allowed. 
VON MOHL'S VEGETABLE CELL. 
We desire in a special manner to commend this condensed 
treatise l not only to botanists, but to animal physiologists, to 
1 Grundzilge der Anatomic und Physiologie der vegetabilischen Zelle. 
Hugo Von Mohl : Braunschweig, 1851. English translation (Prindples 
°f the Anatomy and Physiology of the Vegetable Cell) by Arthur Henfrey, 
London, 1852. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xv. 451.) 
medical students, and to all who would obtain a clear view of 
the present state of vegetable anatomy and physiology, — a 
knowledge of which, most interesting in itself, is almost indispensable 
to the correct understanding of the minute anatomy 
and physiology of animals. Professor Mohl is, without question, 
the first of vegetable anatomists, and his statements carry 
with them the highest authority on this class of subjects. We 
copy the short preface which he has contributed to the English 
translation, as it gives a clear view of the nature and 
scope of the work. 
" Mr. Arthur Henfrey having informed me that he intends 
publishing an English translation of the present treatise, I 
take this opportunity of making known to the English reader 
the purpose I had in view in the preparation of the book. 
The following pages were not originally intended to appear as 
an independent work, or to give a summary of the wide subject 
of the Anatomy and Physiology of Plants, but appeared as an 
article in the ' Cyclopedia of Physiology,' published by Dr. 
Rudolph Wagner of Gottingen, drawn up to furnish students 
of Animal Physiology, and more particularly the medical 
profession, with a review of the anatomical and physiological 
conditions of vegetables (of the cell), in order to enable them 
to form a definite judgment upon the analogies which might 
be drawn between the structure and vital functions of animals 
and plants. This intention, together with the circumstance 
that I was compelled to crowd the whole exposition into the 
space of a few sheets, rendered it necessary to direct especial 
attention to the individual cell, as the fundamental organ of 
the vegetable organism. Since, however, the cell only presents 
itself in anatomical and physiological independence in 
the lowest plants, and since, in the more highly organized 
plants, both the structure and the physiological functions of 
the individual cells become subject to greater dependence 
upon the other parts of the plant, in proportion as the collective 
organization of the vegetable is more complex ; moreover, 
since functions then present themselves, of which no trace can 
be found in the lower plants, it became requisite to take account 
of the plants of higher rank, and of the various organs 
which these possess. The treatise, therefore, contains, if an 
imperfect, still in many respects a more extensive resume of 
Vegetable Physiology than might have been conjectured from 
the title. 
" Unhappily, the Physiology of Plants is a science which 
yet lies in its earliest infancy. Few of its dogmas can be regarded 
as settled beyond doubt ; at every step we meet with 
imperfect observations, and consequently with the most contradictory 
views ; thus, for example, opinions are still quite 
divided regarding the doctrines of the development of the 
cell, of the origin of the embryo, and of the existence of an 
impregnation in the higher Cryptogams. Both in these and 
in other cases, the small compass of the present treatise forbids 
a more extensive detail of the researches upon which the 
opposing views are founded; I hope, however, that I have 
succeeded in making clearly prominent the chief points upon 
which these contests turn, and thus in facilitating the formation 
of a judgment by the reader ; and I have never neglected 
to indicate the literature from which further instruction is to 
be derived." 
It may be well to notice the views of so excellent an observer 
upon sundry points which have been more or less matters 
of controversy. As to the milk-vessels, or vessels of the 
latex, Mohl inclines to adopt the view that considers them as 
intercellular passages which have acquired membranous linings 
(p. 2). He denies that the membrane of nascent cells 
is soluble in water, as Schleiden states (p. 9). He briefly 
states the ground on which, in his controversy with Harting 
and Mulder, he successfully maintains that the primary cellmembrane 
is thickened by successive concentric layers of 
cellulose deposited on its inner face. The combination of 
spiral markings and pits on the wood-cells of Taxus and Torreya, 
as also in the Linden, is explained by considering the 
former to belong to a second layer or deposition within that 
to which the pits belong. This tertiary membrane or deposit 
forms the spiral fibre or band in the cells of the seed-coat of 
Collomia, the hairs of the achenium of Senecio, etc. (p. 18). 
The whole subject of spiral and other markings, rings, dots, 
slits, reticulations, etc., on the walls of cells is expounded in 
a masterly and convincing way. Mohl maintains (p. 28), as 
he has done in the " Botanische Zeitung," that cellulose forms 
the basis of all vegetable membranes in the higher plants, and 
that what Mulder regarded as peculiar compounds are combinations 
of cellulose with foreign infiltrated deposits, which 
interfere with the chemical reactions of cellulose, but which 
may be removed by previous maceration in caustic potash and 
nitric acid. He now maintains, in opposition to his early 
views (still defended by Schleiden), that the intercellular substance 
is a product or secretion of the cell, and not a universally 
distributed mass in which the cells are imbedded (p. 33). 
He shows that the thickened "cuticle" of Unger, Mulder, 
Harting, etc., consists of secondary layers of cell-membrane, 
deposited from the inside, and infiltrated with some substance 
that is colored brown by iodine ; with the exception of an 
extremely thin external pellicle, the real cuticle of Brongniart, 
which is probably a secretion from the surface of the cell, like 
that which forms the outer coat of pollen-grains (p. 35). 
He insists that the layer of protoplasm, his primordial utricle, 
lining the cell is a soft and delicate membrane, and not a mere 
layer of mucilage (p. 37) ; the mode in which this is constructed 
and a partition formed by an inward growth at the 
fold, in the multiplication of cells by division, is very clearly 
explained (p. 50-53). Free cell-formation is said to occur, 
in Phaenogamous plants, only in the embryo-sac, in which both 
the embryonal vesicle, or rudiment of the embryo, and the 
cells of the albumen, originate in this manner ; in the Cryptogamia, 
only in the formation of spores in certain cases, as in 
the Lichens (p. 58) ; contrary to the view of Schleiden, who 
long maintained this to be the universal, and lately a general, 
mode of cell-production. Schleiden's original account of the 
process of the formation of a free cell from a nucleus is 
directly controverted in all essential points ; the nucleus, according 
to Mohl, being always central, and at no time connected 
with the cell-membrane, but always enclosed in the 
primordial utricle. A nucleus, or mass of nitrogenous substance, 
first has the primordial utricle, or nitrogenous mem- 
brane, developed over its surface ; and then the cell-membrane 
(of cellulose) is deposited upon this. In Cryptogamous 
plants, such masses, of larger or smaller size, may become 
coated with a cell-membrane without any proper nucleus appearing 
(pp. 57-60). Thus much for what relates to the anatomical 
condition of the cell. 
Under the second head, the Physiological Condition of 
the Cell, our author treats, first, of the cell as an organ of 
nutrition, next, as an organ of propagation, and finally, as 
an organ of motion. He pronounces against the Knightian 
doctrine, that plants ultimately degenerate and perish when 
propagated for generation after generation by division (from 
the bud) (p. 64). That the crude sap, though absorbed by 
the parenchymatous tissue of the root, ascends through the 
woody tissue, and that the assimilated sap returns through 
the bark, and thence more or less into the wood by means of 
the medullary rays, is very neatly shown. " A few simple experiments 
leave no doubt about this. ... If the bark of a 
plant, best of a tree, is cut through in a ring down to the 
wood, there is no interruption in the flow of sap to the parts 
situated above the wound ; but if the wood is cut through, the 
greatest care being taken to avoid injuring the bark, that portion 
of the plant above the wound dries up at once. From 
the wood of the stem and branches the sap flows onward into 
the leaves, as is proved by the powerful expiration of watery 
vapor from them. Before the sap has reached the leaves it 
is incapable of being applied to nutrition ; consequently the 
vegetation of a plant comes to a stand-still when it is deprived 
of its leaves. The sap ascending from the root to the leaves is 
thence termed the crude sap. It undergoes a chemical change 
in the leaves, rendering it fit to be applied to the nutrition of 
the plant. To this end the sap flows backwards from the leaves 
through the bark to the lower parts, as the following circumstances 
testify. If the bark is cut off the stem in a ring, the 
growth of the portion below the wound stands as it were still ; 
the stem becomes no thicker ; in the potato plant no tubers 
are produced, etc. ; but, on the other hand, the growth above 
the wound is increased beyond the usual measure, thicker 
layers of wood are deposited, more fruit is perfected, this 
ripens sooner, etc. The deposition of starch which occurs in 
the cells of the medullary rays in autumn, goes to prove that 
the portion of assimilated sap which is not used for nutrition 
on the way to the root, runs back to the wood through these 
horizontal medullary rays ; and thus the sap describes a kind of 
circle, not, indeed, in determinate vessels, but in a definite path 
leading through the different parts of the plant. It is difficult 
to see how in recent times the results of these experiments 
could have been so questioned, and the existence of the descending 
current in the bark denied. Certainly it is no improvement 
on the theory cast aside when the increased growth 
above the annular wound is explained by the artificial interruption 
of the upward current of crude sap, in consequence of 
which the sap contained in the upper part of the plant must soon 
become greatly concentrated and potential for development 
(Schleiden, ' Grundziige,' 2d ed., ii. 513). When we can 
succeed in fattening an animal by depriving it of a portion of 
its accustomed food, this explanation may be received as satisfactory 
" (p. 70, 71). After some excellent points of criticism, 
Mohl concludes that the discovery of endosmose has not 
fully solved the problem of the movement of the sap in plants, 
although in all probability it does play an important and perhaps 
the principal part in its absorption and conveyance 
(p. 77). To the question, whether plants live on inorganic 
food alone or take in also organic matters, Mohl gives a sensible 
answer, rejecting the extreme view of Liebig, while still 
fully recognizing the great office and result of vegetation 
(p. 78). According to Mohl, however, it is proved that plants 
do not absorb the carbonic acid dissolved in water with the 
latter by means of their roots (p. 81) ; but this seems hardly 
reconcilable with several facts stated on the next page, from 
which it is justly concluded that carbonic acid is carried 
up with the ascending sap into the leaves. From the fact 
that plants perish so soon in air deprived of all oxygen gas, 
that sensitive leaves lose their irritability under such circumstances, 
etc., Mohl concludes, apparently with good reason, 
that the absorption of oxygen and the exhalation of carbonic 
acid in plants is a true physiological function, intimately connected 
with the life of the plant ; and that this (rather than 
the opposite and predominant nutrient process, through which 
carbonic acid is decomposed and oxygen evolved) should be 
considered as the respiration of plants, if we use the term at 
all (p. 86). "The roots of plants, and not the leaves, take 
up the substances which furnish plants with nitrogen, while, 
on the contrary, the leaves play the essentially active part in 
the absorption of carbonic acid " (p. 88). The analogy of 
the milky juice of plants to the blood of animals, as propounded 
by Schultz, is thoroughly refuted by our author, and 
the flowing movement in the milk-vessels described by Schultz 
is positively denied to take place in an uninjured plant, except 
as produced by mechanical causes. That the milky juice is 
not a nutrient material, still less the nutrient juice, is also 
manifest (p. 96). 
The cell as an organ of propagation is treated, first, as 
respects the multiplication of plants by division ; second, by 
spores ; and third, by seeds. The conjugation of certain 
Confervoid Algm, such as Zygnema, is said to bear no analogy 
to sexual reproduction (p. 113) ; a conclusion which may 
be questioned. A good summary is given of the facts known 
respecting the free and spontaneous movements of the spores 
of the lower Algm (p. 115) ; and also of the recent discoveries 
respecting the bisexual reproduction of the higher Cryptogamia. 

The reprint of Honfrey's Report, in the January and 
March numbers of this Journal, has placed our readers au 
courant with the present state of knowledge on this interesting 
subject. It should be noticed that Mohl denies the existence 
of antheridia in lower Cryptogamia, or Thallophytes ; but 
maintains that the small bodies, moving by two cilia, discovered 
by Decaisne and Thuret in the Fucacem, are more properly 
a second kind of spores, analogous to the small spores 
of the Floridem, than of the nature of the seminal filaments 
of Ferns, Mosses, etc. (p. 117). The latter researches of 
Itzigsohn, Thuret, Tulasne, etc., however, lead rather to the 
conclusion that the lower Cryptogamia (except the very low- 
est) are likewise bisexual. 1 Under the head of Reproduction 
by Seeds, Mohl gives an interesting and critical account of the 
development and structure of the pollen and the ovule, and of 
the origin of the embryo. The latter arises by cell-multiplication 
of the germinal vesicle, a cell produced by free cellformation 
in the embryo-sac usually before the pollen-tube has 
reached the latter. The germinal vesicle and the extremity 
of the pollen-tube are separated by the thickness of the parieties 
of the embryo-sac. The penetration of the pollen-tube 
into the latter or into an introverted portion of it, and the 
formation of the embryo from the apex of the pollen-tube 
itself, as taught by Schleiden, are wholly repudiated ; and 
indeed the Schleidenian doctrine may now be considered as 
thoroughly demolished, by the direct observations of Amici, 
Mohl, Muller, Hofmeister, Unger, Henfrey, and Tulasne. 
The Cell as an Organ of Motion is considered as respects movements 
of individual cells through the agency of vibratile cilia, 
as respects the directions and curvature assumed by organs, 
and as respects movements by irritation of stimuli, etc., giving 
an excellent summary of our knowledge on these points, with 
much admirable criticism ; which want of space prevents us 
from noticing in detail. 
1 Itzigsohn in Botanische Zeitung, May, 1850. — Here it is announced 
that the black dots on the surface of the frond of Borrea ciliaris contain 
antheridia, that is, cells from which escape animalcular-like corpuscles 
that move freely in water, and are similar to those of Mosses and Liverworts. 
Later, after stating that others had failed to detect those movements, 
he announces that they had been observed by Rabenhorst, after 
many ineffectual trials. He also (December, 1850, February, 1851) 
states that these " spermatozoids " do not manifest viral movements until 
after the maceration of the Lichen in water for several days. 
Tulasne (22 R.) Memoire pour servir a I'Histoire Organographique et 
Physiologique des Lichenes ; in Ann. Sciences Naturellcs, 3 ser., xviii., No. 
1, 2, 3, 4 (1852), with 16 plates. — A most admirable and complete 
memoir, elucidating in an unequalled manner the whole structure and 
morphology of the Lichens. It is to be hoped that the author will publish 
it in a separate form, as it introduces a new era in Lichenograpliy. On 
the subject of the so-called antheridia (which alone we can here notice), 
M. Tulasne has recognized the universal occurrence of these bodies in 
Lichens, has ascertained their structure and development ; but he has 
never detected any free movement of the corpuscles, except the general 
ON THE GROWTH OF PLANTS IN GLAZED CASES. 
The first edition of this little treatise, 1 published in 1842, 
is doubtless well known to many of our readers ; and some 
may remember Mr. Ward's original account of his interesting 
discovery of a method of growing every sort of plant in 
the dun atmosphere of the smokiest part of London, pub- 
molecular or Brownian motion common to all minute particles. He 
therefore gives to the so-called antheridia the name of spermogonia, and 
to the contained corpuscles the name of spermalia. He unhesitatingly 
recognizes in them an apparatus of reproduction, doubtless analogous, at 
least in function, to those of the Florideous Algae, in which the corpuscles 
are equally motionless, and of certain Fungi, and therefore probably 
representing male organs. Tulasne likewise calls attention to the fact 
that these dark tubercles or dots were particularly noticed by Dillenius, 
more than a century ago, in Borrera ciliaris ; and that Hedwig, in 1784, 
expressed the opinion that they constituted the male apparatus of Lichens. 
Decaisne & Thuret, Recherches sur les Antkerides et les Spores de quelques 
Fucus ; in Ann. Sci. Nat., 3 ser., iii. p. 5. — Here the corpuscles known 
to the earlier Algologists, and considered by Agardh and Montagne as a 
second kind of spores (a view which Mohl adopts), are announced to be 
the spermatozoids of the antheridia of Fucacem ; their active movements 
are described, and the discovery of the two cilia is announced by whose 
vibration the movement is effected. 
Thuret, Recherches sur les zoospores des Alge'es et les Anlherides des 
Cryptogames. — These researches were communicated to the Academy of 
Sciences, Paris, and were rewarded by the great prize for natural 
sciences, in 1847. A copious abstract has been published in the Ann. Sci. 
Nat., 3 ser., xiv. and xvi. (1850, 1851), with 30 plates. As to antheridia, 
bodies like the free moving corpuscles of the Fucacem are shown 
likewise to occur in all the Florideoe, except that they do not exhibit spontaneous 
movements ; nevertheless, M. Thuret does not hesitate to attribute 
to both the same functions as those which the seminal filaments of 
the higher Cryptogamia fulfil. The Antheridia of Chara (in which Thuret 
first discovered the cilia by whose vibration the coiled filaments are 
moved), of the Liverworts, Mosses, and Ferns, are also admirably illustrated 
; but nothing of consequence is added to the facts mentioned in 
Henfrey's Report. 
Leveille, in Ann. Sci. Nat., 3 ser., xv. p. 119, has indicated the probable 
existence of the analogues of antheridia in Fungi. 
1 On the Growth of Plants in closely glazed Cases. By N. B. Ward. 
London, 1852. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xvi. 132.) 
lished in the " Companion to the Botanical Magazine " in 1836. 
This new edition if reduced in size is increased in interest, 
and is embellished with tasteful illustrations on wood, several 
of them exhibiting approved forms of those glazed cases with 
which the name of our author is inseparably connected. The 
first chapter, on the natural conditions of plants, their relations 
to heat, light, and moisture, and the necessity of attending 
to the particular conditions, or combinations of circumstances, 
under which each species flourishes, is illustrated by 
ingenious and often novel observations. The second chapter 
treats of the causes which interfere with the natural conditions 
of plants in large towns, and gives some idea of the 
obstacles which prevent the cultivation of even ordinary 
plants in the open air of London, and to some extent in other 
large British towns. The third, on the imitation of the natural 
conditions of plants in closely glazed cases, tells us how 
a simple incident (the accidental growth of a seedling fern 
and a grass in a glass bottle, in which the chrysalis of a 
Sphinx had been buried in some moist mould), carefully and 
wisely reflected on, taught Mr. Ward how to overcome these 
obstacles, and thus to surround himself with his favorite 
plants, in beautiful vegetation, while living in one of the 
murkiest parts of London, and even to grow with complete 
success such ferns as the Trichomanes radicans, which is ut- 
terly uncultivable in any other way. A fourth chapter treats 
of the conveyance of living plants on shipboard ; which 
brings to view one of the most important practical applications 
of Mr. Ward's discovery. 
Sir William Hooker states that " the Wardian Cases have 
been the means, in the last fifteen years, of introducing more 
new and valuable plants to our gardens than were imported 
during the preceding century ; and in the character of Domestic 
Greenhouses, i. e., as a means of. cultivating plants with 
success in our parlors, our halls, and our drawing-rooms, they 
have constituted a new era in horticulture." Formerly only 
one plant in a thousand survived the voyage from China to 
England. Recently, availing himself of our author's discovery, 
Mr. Fortune planted 250 species of plants in these cases in 
China, and landed 215 of them in England alive and healthful. 
The same person lately conveyed in this way 20,000 growing 
tea-plants, in safety and high health, from Shanghai to the 
Himalayas. In fact, this mode of conveyance is now universally 
adopted, and has proved so successful, whenever properly 
managed, that it is no exaggeration to say that, probably, 
" there is not a single portion of the civilized world 
which has not been more or less benefited by the invention." 
An indispensable requisite to success in the transmission of 
living plants by this method is, that the glazed cases should 
be freely exposed to the light. Where this cannot be done, 
we must be content with the former method, of conveying 
plants in a passive condition, closely packed in peat-moss, — 
a plan, however, which is only partially successful in protracted 
voyages. Two additional and highly interesting 
chapters treat of the application of the " closed " plan in improving 
the condition of the poor ; and on its probable future 
applications in comparative researches in vegetable physiology, 
and even in the treatment of diseases. To these, as 
to the other topics of the work, no justice can be rendered to 
our author's suggestions except by lengthened quotations, 
■which the nature of this notice does not admit of. It must 
suffice to direct attention to this fascinating little volume. 
Those who read it and who have a true fondness for growing 
plants will scarcely be contented without a Ward case, of more 
or less pretension ; which they will find an unfailing source of 
interest, especially during the long and total suspension of 
vegetation in our protracted winters. With proper management, 
and with the requisite amount of light, any plant may 
ius be cultivated. But we particularly recommend Ferns and 
ycopodia, of the most delicate kinds, as requiring least care, 
and as making the prettiest appearance at all seasons. Most 
of these require little light ; although our clear skies afford 
is this in abundance. So little bituminous coal is consumed, 
even in our largest cities, that the "fuliginous matter" with 
which all British towns are begrimed and rendered noxious 
to vegetation, here interposes no obstacle to rearing plants, 
unlike England, the principal obstacle to the growth of 
delicate plants in our houses in winter, and in our grounds 
in summer, comes from the dryness of the air. For this, the 
Ward case affords a perfect remedy; as nothing is easier 
than to furnish a saturated atmosphere for those plants that 
require it, or to supply and retain the degree of moisture 
which suits any particular species. 
HOOKER AND THOMSON'S INDIAN FLORA. 
One half of this volume 1 is occupied by the Introductory 
Essay, in which a series of important general topics, akin to 
those discussed in the introduction to Dr. Hooker's New Zealand 
Flora, are treated with equal boldness and judgment, 
and with the same freshness and originality of illustration. 
These are arranged under six general heads, namely : 1. The 
object, scope, and design of the " Flora Indica." 2. General 
considerations connected with the study of systematic botany. 
3. The variation and origin of species, the effects of hybridization, 
and the geographical distribution of species. 4. Summary 
of the labors of Indian botanists. 5. Sketch of the 
meteorology of India. 6. Sketch of the physical features 
and vegetation of the provinces of India. To which two maps 
are added : one of monthly isotherms, from Dove ; the other a 
large and original map illustrating the physical geography of 
India and its botanical provinces. A complete alphabetical 
index to this part of the work is appended, as well as a detailed 
table of contents. 
To enumerate even the principal points which are discussed 
would require a space which we are unable now to devote to 
this subject. Some of them we may hope to consider hereafter 
in other connections. Among the conclusions or suggestions 
that strike us as most true and timely are : The great 
1 Flora Indica ; being a systematic account of the Plants of British 
India. Vol. I. By J. D. Hooker and Thomas Thomson. {Ranunculacece 
to Fumariacem.) With an Introductory Essay. London, 1855. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxi. 134.) 
want on the part of many naturalists of clear and logical 
views in respect to classification and system ; — " the prevailin<> 
tendency on the part of students of all branches of natural 
history to exaggerate the number of species, and to 
separate accidental forms by trifling characters ; " — the unphilosophical 
and detrimental character of " the modern system 
of elevating every minor group, however trifling the 
peculiarities by which it is distinguished, to the rank of a 
genus; " in other words, of considering every group of species 
to form a genus, — evincing a want of appreciation of the true 
value and nature of classification ; — the fact that in the vegetable 
kingdom we do not discover that close and obvious connection 
between structure and function which is almost universally 
apparent in the animal kingdom, giving to physiology 
a greater influence over classification in zoology than in 
botany, and offering a guide to determining the relative value 
of structural characters in the one kingdom which is comparatively 
little available in the other, but yet may not safely 
be neglected. 
Our authors assume, as most accordant with known facts 
on the whole, that species are distinct creations, and not arbitrary 
assumptions of the systematists ; and they adopt that 
idea of species which alone appears to give them a perfectly 
clear and intelligible, distinct, objective existence in nature, 
namely, that they consist of individuals which have originated 
each from a common stock. They assume not only their 
original, but their continued definiteness in nature ; but their 
variations, surprising as they often are, are restricted within 
certain limits, to which we may add that these limits are not 
a priori determinable. Among the causes inducing variation, 
or tending to produce a blended series of individual forms, if 
such did not exist from the beginning, they first consider the 
effects of hybridization ; and remark that recent experiments 
have led to the following results : 
"1. It is a much more difficult operation to produce hybrids, 
even under every advantage, than is usually supposed. 
The number of species capable of being impregnated, even by 
skillful management, is very few ; and in nature the stigma 
exerts a specific action, which not only favors and quickens 
the operation of the pollen of its own species, but resists and 
retards the action of that of another ; so that the artist has 
not only to forestall the natural operation, but to experience 
opposition to his conducting the artificial one. 
" 2. Even when the impregnation is once effected, very few 
seeds are produced ; still fewer of these ripen ; and fewest of 
all become healthy plants, capable of maintaining an independent 
existence. 
" 3. The offspring of a hybrid has never yet been known 
to possess a character foreign to those of its parents ; but it 
blends those of each; — whence hybridization must be regarded 
as a means of obliterating, not creating, species. 
" 4. The offspring of hybrids are almost invariably absolutely 
barren, nor do we know an authenticated instance of 
the second generation maturing its seeds. 
"5. In the animal kingdom hybrids are still rarer in an 
artificial state, are all but unknown in a natural one, and are 
almost invariably barren." 
Perhaps some of these dicta are too unqualifiedly stated ; 
indeed they are manifestly intended to affirm the results to 
which the whole evidence points, rather than those which can 
be said to be thoroughly verified. 
The third proposition, however, is absolutely true ; and in 
connection with it, well do our authors say, that all we could 
legitimately conclude is, that were hybrids of the general 
occurrence which some botanists imagine, they would lono- ago 
have obliterated all traces of species as definite creations ; 
whereas, exceptional in art, and not proven if not almost impossible 
in nature, they cannot be assumed to have produced 
any appreciable result. There is one point, however, which 
our authors do not take into consideration, but which should 
not be overlooked, namely, what is generally admitted as a 
fact, that a hybrid may readily be fertilized by the pollen of 
either of its parents ; and that if hybrid plants are occasionally 
produced in nature, they would ordinarily stand a very 
good chance of being fertilized in this way. In such cases 
they are said to revert to the type of the species of the im- 
pregnating parent ; but would they return exactly to that 
type, inheriting as they do a portion of the blood of a cognate 
species? And where —as not unfrequently occurs — two or 
more generally well-marked forms in nature are connected by 
certain occasional individuals of intermediate character is it 
not very supposable that two species may have partially blended 
in this way ? At any rate there is a vera causa, or what passes 
as such, which requires to be taken into account, as has not 
yet been done, so far as we know. This doubtless has operated 
in the case of cultivated plants, and contributed, along 
with other causes, to the inextricable blending of certain 
species. But we are not disposed to exaggerate its influence 
in nature ; since we suppose, with Dr. Hooker, that wild 
plants rarely hybridize. Yet the possibility and even the 
probability of the occurrence must not be overlooked in a 
thorough discussion of the general question of the limitation 
and permanence of species. 
However it may be as a blending influence, hybridization is 
far from being a considerable, or the most potent cause of 
the variation of species, since " the offspring of a hybrid has 
never yet been known to possess a character foreign to those 
of its parents." And we equally agree with our authors that 
the known facts of the case "especially warn us not to consider 
the influence of climate as paramount in determining 
the distribution of species or the prevalence of forms," or 
even as the most efficient cause of variation. What the cause 
is that the legitimate offspring does occasionally possess a 
character foreign to those of its parents we are wholly unable 
to say ; but the fact is undoubted, and perhaps of more frequent 
occurrence than is generally supposed. It is usual to 
say that the abnormal forms originate only in cultivated or 
domesticated individuals : it were perhaps better to say that 
they were perpetuated, or are favorably situated for continuation 
and full development, only under these circumstances, on 
account of the greater segregation ; for of the very various 
species of plants which are cultivated none are free from the 
tendency to " sport " into races, whether of ancient or of 
recent introduction. Why their existence is so transitory in 
nature, and so capable of being continued and further developed 
in domestication, it is not difficult to imagine. Our 
authors perhaps, in common with naturalists generally, do not 
sufficiently recognize the natural tendency to perpetuation of 
individual characteristics. 
As regards ordinary variation between different individuals 
of the same species, the want of due consideration of what 
every good observer knows to be true, has indeed " mainly 
contributed to such an undue multiplication of species in the 
vegetable kingdom as botanists unfamiliar with large herbaria 
and exotic plants are slow to believe, and to the exaggerated 
estimates of the supposed known extent of the vegetable creation 
that gain common credence." Our authors believe that 
the number is swelled one third beyond its due extent by the 
introduction of bad species founded on habit, and on accidental 
variations produced by soil, exposure, etc. ; and, we 
would add, on the imperfection of the materials from which 
the greater part of the species that crowd our books were 
originally described, most of them without due elaboration of 
already published species, and drawing after them an ever 
lengthening train of nominal species, founded on mere guesses 
at supposed differences from vague and incomplete descrij)-tions, 
without any collection of specimens. 
We have already exceeded our limits, while yet at the 
beginning of Drs. Hooker and Thomson's interesting and 
suggestive volume. We regret that we must omit all notice 
of their remarks upon habit as indicating specific difference, 
which, contrary to the general view, they regard as " most 
deceptive," and must pass over their important section 
upon geographical distribution in general, and its dependence 
upon specific centres. We only add, that whoever would 
attain a clear comprehension of the configuration, the diverse 
climates, and the general botanical geography of those extensive 
and widely varied regions which are comprised, and in 
most minds confused, under the general name of India, has 
only to study the admirable sections on the meteorology of 
India, and on the physical features and vegetation of its 
provinces, which occupy a large portion of the Introductory 
Essay. The present commencement of the Flora itself, 
although comprising only fifteen natural orders, is also an 
inviting subject for extended comment and almost unqualified 
commendation. 
DE CANDOLLE'S GÉOGRAPHIE BOTANIQUE. 
The " Geographie Botanique " 2 of De Candolle is not only 
one of the most important works of our day, but one which 
addresses, and will greatly interest, a much broader circle of 
scientific readers than any other modern production of a 
botanical author. It is, and probably long will be, the standard 
treatise upon a wide class of questions, highly and almost 
equally interesting to the botanist, the zoologist, the geologist, 
the ethnologist, and the student of general terrestrial physics. 
To its production the author has devoted no small portion of 
the best years of his life ; and it bears throughout the marks 
of untiring labor, directed by a remarkably sound, conscientious, 
and thoroughly systematic mind. Along with the admirable 
methodical spirit which is his by rightful inheritance, 
the younger De Candolle brings to these investigations a particular 
aptitude for numerical and exact forms, an intimate 
acquaintance with general physical science, and considerable 
ethnological and philological learning ; which last is turned to 
good account in his chapters on the history of cultivated and 
naturalized plants. The result in the work before us — even 
if there were no other claims to the distinction — may fairly 
be said to go far toward inscribing the name of De Candolle 
anew in that select list of philosophical naturalists in which 
his father holds so eminent a position. 
To give some idea of the topics considered in these volumes, 
and of the order of investigation (which proceeds in an admirable 
course, from the more simple, general, and better 
1 Geographie Botanique raisonne'e, ou Exposition des Faites principaux et 
des Lois concernant la Distribution Ge'ographique des Plantes de I'Europe 
Actuelle. Alphonse De Candolle. Paris and Geneva, 1855. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxii. 429.) 
known facts and principles towards the more complex, hypothetical 
and obscure), we will copy the titles of the chapters, 
twenty-seven in number ; which are arranged in four books, 
and subdivided into articles, and these again into sections, to 
such an extent as to fill eight closely printed pages with the 
bare enumeration. Indeed, this repeated subdivision gives a 
rigid and rather tedious aspect to some parts of the work, and 
involves occasional repetitions ; but it would not be easy to 
collocate well and clearly so vast an amount of material in 
any better way. 
The First Book is occupied with some preliminary considerations 
upon the way in which temperature, light, and moisture 
act upon plants. Its three chapters treat of the relations 
of plants to surrounding physical conditions, and especially to 
heat and light ; and contain the author's happy distinction between 
the temperatures actually operative in vegetation, and 
those which (being below the freezing point, etc.) are altogether 
null for vegetation, and ought to be eliminated from 
the tables of mean temperature, when these are viewed in 
relation to the northern and southern geographical range of 
species. 
The Second Book is devoted to Geographical Botany, or 
the study of species, genera, and families, from a geographical 
point of view. Chapter iv. relates to the limitation of species 
upon plains and upon mountains, and the probable causes of 
their actual limits, applied both to spontaneous and cultivated 
plants ; and there is good endeavor to show that the northern 
limit of species is fixed rather by the sum of heat available for 
vegetation during the growing season, than by the mean temperature 
of the year. Chapter v. treats of the shape of the 
area occupied by a species, a very curious point ; and it seems 
that the area of species inclines to be circular or elliptical. 
Chapter vi. treats of the associations or disjunction of the individuals 
of a species in its area. Chapter vii. treats of the 
area of species as to extent of surface, considered as to the 
families they belong to, as to stations, as to size and duration 
of the plant, and as to the character of the fruit and seed, 
whether affording facilities to dispersion or not. Chapter viii. 
considers the changes which may have taken place in the habitation 
of species, and discusses with great fullness the whole 
subject of naturalization, the obstacles in the way, the causes 
and means of transport, and the interchanges which have been 
effected between the New and the Old Worlds. Chapter ix. 
is a very long and interesting one, on the geographical origin 
of the principal cultivated plants, not only those intentionally, 
but also those unintentionally cultivated by man, — a chapter 
full of valuable matter, carefully collected and well discussed. 1 
Chapter x. treats of disjoined species, — those occupying two 
or more widely separated areas, and not in intermediate 
stations. Chapter xi. discourses of the early condition and 
probable origin of the existing species ; and brings out the 
various facts which go far to prove the geological antiquity of 
the greater part of existing species ; and that their creation 
was probably successive. Chapter xii. treats of genera and 
their geographical distribution, and maintains the view (in 
which we by no means coincide) that genera are truly naturally-limited 
groups, even more so than species. Chapter 
xiii. is devoted to the distribution of the species of a genus 
within its area. Chapter xiv. treats of the extent of surface 
occupied by genera. Chapter xv. discourses of the origin and 
duration of genera. Chapters xvi.-xix. treat of families, as 
to their area, geographical limits, the distribution of species 
within the area of the family, etc. 
The Third Book is devoted to Geographical Botany, or the 
characters of different countries considered as to their vegetation. 
Chapter xx., of the characters of the vegetation of a 
country ; considered, in Chapter xxi., as to the relative numbers 
in the great classes respectively. Chapter xxii., comparison 
of different countries in respect to those natural orders 
1 It is singular that M. De Candolle should be so slow to abandon the 
idea that the aborigines of Carolina, or any other part of North America, 
cultivated or knew anything of the Potato, which, if Raleigh obtained 
them in Carolina, were certainly imported thither. But, though our 
aborigines had no Potatoes, they had Pumpkins or Squashes and Beans, 
which all writers upon the history of cultivated plants have overlooked 
except the late Dr. Harris. 
which abound most in species ; and Chapter xxiii., as regards 
their most characteristic natural families. Chapter xxiv., on 
the variety of vegetable forms in different countries and in the 
world at large, i. e., the probable number of species, the proportion 
of genera to species, and of orders of genera and 
species. Chapter xxv., the division of the earth's surface 
into natural botanical regions. Chapter xxvi., sketch of the 
vegetation of the different countries in respect to the probable 
origin of their existing species, etc. 
The Fourth Book, of a single brief chapter, consists merely 
of a summary of the author's general conclusions. We give 
these entire, for convenience availing ourselves of a translation 
in Hooker's " Journal of Botany." 
" The plants now inhabiting the globe have survived many 
changes, geological, geographical, and, latterly, historical. 
The history of their distribution is hence intimately connected, 
with that of the whole vegetable kingdom. 
" To explain existing facts, it is fortunately unnecessary to 
adopt any conclusion upon the most obscure hypotheses of 
cosmogony and pakeontology, or on the mode of creation of 
species, the number originally created, and their primitive 
distribution. Botanical geography can indicate certain probabilities, 
certain theories, but the principal facts in distribution 
depend upon more recent and less obscure causes. It 
suffices to understand and to allow certain facts and theories, 
which appear probable, namely, that groups of organized beino-s 
under different hereditary forms (classes, orders, genera, 
species, and races) have appeared in different places and at 
different times ; the more simple perhaps at first, the more 
complicated afterwards ; that each of these groups has had a 
primitive centre of creation of greater or less extent ; that 
they have, during the period of their existence, been able to 
become more rare or common, to spread more or less widely, 
according to the nature of the plants composing them, the 
means of propagation and diffusion they are possessed of, the 
absence or presence of animals noxious to them, the form and 
extent of the area they inhabit, the nature of the successive 
climates of each country, and the means of transport that the 
relative positions of land and sea may afford ; that many of 
these groups have become extinct, whilst others have increased, 
at least so far as can be judged by comparing existing epochs 
with preceding ones ; and lastly, that the latest geological 
epoch, the Quaternary (that which preceded the existence of 
man in Europe, and which followed the last elevation of the 
Alps), has lasted many thousand years, during which important 
geographical and physical changes have affected Europe 
and some neighboring countries, whilst other regions of the 
globe have suffered no change, or have been exposed to a different 
series of changes. 
" Thus the principal facts of geology and palaeontology, reduced 
to the most general and incontestable, suffice to explain 
the facts of Botanical geography, or at least to indicate the 
nature of the explanation, which it requires the progress of 
many sciences to complete. 
" The most numerous, the most important, and often the 
most anomalous facts in the existing distribution of plants, 
are explained by the operation of causes anterior to those now 
in operation, or by the joint operation of these and of still 
more ancient causes, sometimes of such as are primitive (connected 
with the earliest condition of the planet). The geographical 
and physical operations of our own epoch play but 
a secondary part. I have shown that in starting from an 
original fact, which it is impossible to understand, of the creation 
of a certain form, in a certain country, and at a certain 
time, we ought to be able, and sometimes are able to explain 
the following facts, chiefly by causes that operated previous to 
our own epoch : 1, the very unequal areas occupied by natural 
orders, genera, and species ; 2, the disconnection of the areas 
that some of the species inhabit ; 3, the distribution of the 
species of a genus or family in the area occupied by the genus 
or family ; 4, the differences between the vegetations of countries 
that have analogous climates and that are not far apart, 
and the resemblance between the vegetation of the countries 
that are apart, but between which an interchange of plants is 
now impossible. 
" The only phenomena explainable by existing circum- 
stances, are : 1, the limitation of species, and consequently of 
genera and families, in every country where they now appear ; 
2, the distribution of the individuals of a species in the 
country it inhabits ; 3, the geographical origin and extension 
of cultivated species ; 4, the naturalization of species and the 
opposite phenomenon of their increasing rarity ; 5, the disappearance 
of species contemporaneous with man. 
" In all this we observe proofs of the greater influence of 
primitive causes, and of those anterior to our epoch ; but the 
growing activity of man is daily effacing these, and it is no 
small advantage of our progressing civilization that it enables 
us to collect a multitude of facts of which our successors will 
have no visible and tangible proof." 
An Appendix, indicating the researches now needed for the 
advancement of Geographical-botanical science, under several 
heads, addressed respectively to physicists and meteorologists, 
to geographers, to geologists, to vegetable physiologists, descriptive 
and traveling botanists, and to philologists, brings 
these most interesting volumes to a conclusion. 
Our present object is to call the attention of American naturalists 
and natural philosophers to this work, not to criticise 
it. That would require much consideration and a wider 
range of knowledge than we can pretend to. There are, however, 
several topics upon which we are inclined to venture a 
few remarks, as fitting opportunities occur. 
HENFREY'S BOTANY. 
This is a well-planned, compact, and comprehensive work, 
in which we may say, that the author has fairly accomplished 
his purpose, namely : — "to produce a good working 
text-book for the student, from which may be obtained a 
groundwork of knowledge in all branches of the science, 
1 An Elementary Course of Botany ; Structural, Physiological, and Systematic 
; with a brief Outline of the Geographical and Geological Distribution 
of Plants. By Arthur Henfrey. London, 1857. (American Journal 
of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxiv. 434.) 
without the attention being diverted from the more striking 
features of the subject by details comparatively unimportant." 

The work is divided into four parts. I. Morphology or 
Comparative Anatomy ; treating, in successive chapters, Ist, of 
General Morphology ; 2d, of the Phanerogamia, or the parts 
of Flowering plants and their modifications, and the laws 
which regulate them ; 3d, Morphology of tho Cryptogamia. 
Part 11. Systematic Botany ; treating, Ist, of the principles of 
Classification; 2d, of systems of Classification, and 3d, Systematic 
Descriptions of the natural orders, followed by an 
artificial analysis. Part 111. Physiology ; comprising, Ist, 
the physiological Anatomy of plants ; 2d, general considerations 
on the Physiology of plants ; 3d, Physiology of Vegetation 
; 4th, the reproduction of plants ; sth, Miscellaneous 
phenomena, under which are ranked the evolution of heat in 
plants, luminosity, and movements of plants. Part IV. Geographical 
and Geological Botany, very summarily disposed 
of in about forty pages. 
It seems strange at first to interpose systematic botany 
between the morphological and the physiological ; but if the 
anatomy and physiology of plants are to be completely disjoined 
from the study of the organs of the plant as a whole, the 
present arrangement is perhaps as good as any. It is adopted, 
as the preface shows, for the convenience of instructing medical 
students, who compose the principal part of classes in Great 
Britain as well as on the Continent ; — for whom " one short 
course of lectures is devoted to this science, and three months 
is commonly all the time allotted to the teacher for laying the 
foundations and building the superstructure of a knowledge 
of botany in the minds of his pupils, very few of whom come 
prepared even with the most rudimentary acquaintance with 
the science." But the author remarks that "if the previous 
education of medical students prepared them, as it should, 
with an elementary knowledge of the natural sciences, we 
should make physiology the most conspicuous feature of a 
course of botany in a medical school." 
While in England botany is scarcely an academical study, 
here it pertains to collegiate and academical instruction where 
it is taught at all. In Europe not even an apothecary can be 
licensed without passing an examination in botany ; in the 
whole United States, we believe, it forms no part, at least no 
regular part, of the medical curriculum ; no medical school has 
a botanical chair ; and no knowledge whatever of the science 
of the vegetable kingdom, which supplies the greater part of 
the materia medica, is required for the degree of Doctor in 
Medicine ! 
Professor Henfrey is chiefly known, and most highly esteemed, 
as a vegetable anatomist. Upon this subject he may 
speak with an authority which as a systematist, or even as a 
morphologist, he would not pretend to. We shall offer no 
apology, therefore, for making an occasional criticism, and 
for pointing out several errors in matters of detail. These 
are not intended to disparage the work, for if we had not 
formed a high opinion of it on the whole, we should not take 
this trouble. 
As respects the first point noticed, our author, if wrong, is 
not alone. Still, we hardly expected him to teach that the 
radicle of the embryo is the true root ; and we cannot let 
pass unchallenged his reiterated statement that in Monocotyledons, 
the radicle, or its inferior extremity, is never developed 
into a root in germination, but is abortive (pp. 14, 16, 
18, 391, 537). Any one who will examine the germination 
of the seed of an Iris, an Onion, or even of a grain of Indian 
Corn, cannot fail to perceive that a primary root is developed, 
and that this is a direct prolongation of the extremity of the 
radicle. This, indeed, does not continue as a tap-root; 
neither does it in a great many Dicotyledons. In Squashes, 
Pumpkins, etc., there is no one primary root, but a cluster of 
rootlets from the first, all springing from the base of the stout 
radicle. In fact, this distinction between Monocotyledons 
and Dicotyledons is null. A character of certain monocotyledonous 
embryos, neither strictly peculiar to the class, nor by 
any means universal in it, should not be assumed as distinctive. 
As to the morphology of the radicle itself, we suppose that the 
germination of any of the larger Cucurbitacem, or of a bean, 
would suffice to convince any observer that the radicle is simply 
the first internode of the stem, giving birth to the primary root 
from its inferior extremity, usually, — and indeed, from the 
exceptional cases where it does not we should draw additional 
proof of its cauline nature. In fact, we know of no character 
in which a root differs from an internode of a stem in 
which it does not also differ from the radicle, excepting its 
tendency to direct its inferior extremity downwards. Again, 
should the statement, that " the radicle of a monocotyledonous 
embryo is never developed " be held to mean that the radicle 
never lengthens, we remark, no more does it in the Pea and 
some other hypogseous Dicotyledons ; and we are not quite 
sure that the statement is absolutely true of all Monocotyledons. 

Boot-hairs or fibrillcß are mentioned (p. 19) as "often" 
occurring on young roots. Do they not always occur ? Surely 
it cannot be true that : " the branches of the axial root are 
originally growths from the apex of the root thrown off to 
the side," (p. 538). By some slip of the pen, Myrica Gale 
is adduced as an instance of whorled leaves (p. 45). 
On p. 49 the expression " over the petiole," instead of 
above or within it, would lead to a misconception. 
Something more might be said about the tendrils of Cucurbitacem 
(which, besides, are not always single) ; but are the 
students of King's College really taught that, " tendrils of 
the vine are metamorphosed flowering branches arising in the 
axils of the leaves " ? (p. 62.) 
"In all seeds except in those of the few orders which 
present an incomplete or acotyledonous embryo, we do not 
find the young plant possessed ... of a plumule " (p. 66). 
Even some much developed embryos, such as those of Maple 
and Morning Glory, do not show the plumule until after the 
full development of the cotyledons. It may be said, indeed, 
that the plumule is in posse when not in esse, but so it is no 
less in the cases excepted from the statement. 
Very singular is the statement (on p. 68) that in England 
" the terminal bud of the Lilac is generally killed by the 
frost in the winter ; " since in our much colder winter it is as 
completely hardy as the other buds whenever it happens to 
be formed, and, like them, is well developed before summer 
is over. As a general rule here, and we presume in England 
also, no terminal winter bud appears during the growing 
season, and so there is none to be killed by the frost of the 
following winter. 
The deeply alveolate receptacle of the Cotton-Thistle is 
figured (on p. 78) as an illustration of a paleaceous receptacle. 

Truly terminal flowers are said to be rare (p. 86) : we do 
not quite understand this. 
The interesting questions relating to the pbyllotaxy and 
symmetry of the flower are clearly stated, but no new light is 
brought to bear upon them, — nor all of the old. The opposition 
of the stamens of lihamnacece to the petals is, as usual, 
attributed to the probable suppression of an outer stamineal 
circle, although there is nothing in the blossom (as there is 
in Geraniacece, etc.) to base the supposition upon. And our 
author has overlooked the most natural of explanations for 
this and strictly like cases, the one moreover which tells 
directly against the doctrine of transverse chorisis, — namely, 
that in these cases of ante-position there is a return to 
normal phyllotaxy, i. e., to the superposition of the corresponding 
elements of successive whorls, — a view first suggested, 
we believe, by Lestibudois. 
" Eeal cases of collateral multiplication may probably be 
explained by comparison of a primary staminal leaf with an 
ordinary compound stem-leaf, and supposing the filament to 
subdivide like the petiole does [sic] in such cases." This is 
certainly the way we regard it ; and as respects the application 
of this hypothesis to the stamens of Cruciferoe, we do not see 
what argument Megacarpcea polyandra brings against it ; as 
the increase in the number of stamens is quite as explicable 
upon this as upon the ordinary theory. Indeed, our author's 
view that the glands represent suppressed stamens would seem 
to be negatived by this very case, since the glands have not disappeared 
with the increase of the stamens, but the contrary. 
The abnormal fertile flowers of Viola and Impatiens are 
not " achlamydeous," as our author states them to be (p. 90) ; 
generally they are not even apetalous. 
In the botanical sense of the word, and as it is employed in 
the same sentence (p. 93), the petals of the vine cannot be 
said "to cohere above." The valvate petals are merely caducous 
for the most part before expanding, just as is more decidedly 
the case in many' Araliacem. In passing, we remark 
that a valvate aestivation of the corolla in the latter is much 
less distinctive than our author supposes (p. 311). Aralia 
itself has the petals imbricated in the bud. 
It is becoming common to regard the tube of a so-called 
superior calyx as a cup-like receptacle ; and there appears to 
be reason for it in Cactacece and some other cases. Professor 
Henfrey would seem to apply this view universally ; " for example, 
in Rosacem, Dmbelliferm, Cucurbitacem, Compositmy 
[!] etc. But if applied to Eosa, why not to the Sanguisorbem 
and to other Rosacem with a calyx-tube lined with a disk 
bearing the stamens, etc. ? And is the cup a receptacle in 
those Melastomacem which have an adnate ovary, but a calyx 
when the ovary is free ? And how is it when the ovary and 
cup cohere only by the nerves of the latter ? 
For palem Professor Henfrey coins an English word, " pales " 
(p. 110), of which the singular would probably be " pale." 
We would propose to call them " palets." 
There are convincing reasons why the perigynium of Carex 
cannot be regarded as a perianth, as our author takes it to be 
(p. 111). 
It is not correct to say that the false dissepiments of Datura 
are formed " while the seeds are ripening " (p. 124) ; they 
equally exist in the ovary. And we doubt if the transverse 
false septa in Cathartocarpus and other Leguminosm are 
" placental developments." 
We are pleased to find that our author prefers to consider 
placentas as belonging to the carpels rather than to the axis, 
although the close of paragraph 226 appears to imply the 
contrary. 
We cannot agree that, " externally the campylotropous 
ovule resembles the anatropous, except that there is no 
rhaphe " (p. 130). No attentive student could fail to recognize 
the difference, especially in the families cited ( Gruciferm 
and Caryophyllacemj. 
Eipening must be regarded in a remarkably broad sense 
when it is stated with emphasis, " that the distinction between 
endocarps and epicarps, in the common stone-fruits, arises 
entirely during the ripening of fruit." Also : "it is well 
known that the easy separation of the pulp from the stone is 
a sign of ripeness." When are cling-stone peaches ripe? 
Again: "In Taxus . . . during the ripening of the seed a 
succulent cup-like envelope grows up around it" (p. 136). Is 
ripening synonymous with the formation and growth, as well 
as the maturing of the fruit ? 
Lindley' s system of the classification and nomenclature of 
fruits is adopted, with some modifications. It is well to have 
such a system, as an analysis of the diversities of structure ; 
but of the thirty-six kinds so carefully defined and named 
only fifteen or sixteen are ever used in descriptive botany, or 
ever will be, it is devoutly hoped. There is much inconvenience 
in practice, and little advantage in designating every 
possible modification of the same organ or set of organs by a 
distinct substantive name, or in distinguishing by separate 
technical names fruits formed of a simple ovary from those 
of a compound ovary, or fruits with an adherent from those 
with a free ovary. Why not call the gooseberry and the 
grape equally a berry, instead of restricting this name to the 
former and naming the latter a nuculanium ; and why name 
the pod of an Iris a diplotegia, while that of a Lily is called 
a capsule ? And while we term the pod of Saxifraga stellaris 
a capsule, and that of S. tridactylites a diplotegia, what 
name are we to apply to that of S. aizoides, which is only 
half -superior ? 
Probably a wrong example is adduced on p. 148, for we 
cannot believe that any species of Banunculus has the rhaphe 
averse from the placenta in the ripe fruit. By an oversight, 
on the same page, the fruits of Labiatm are spoken of as 
seeds. 
As respects the systematic part, the chapters on the prin- 
ciples of classification, nomenclature, etc., strike us as sound 
and good throughout ; and in the account of the natural orders 
a great amount of information, such as the medical student 
needs, is given in a comparatively small space. Errors 
or misconceptions will necessarily occur in the compilation of 
such an amount of materials, treating of structure, affinities, 
distribution, sensible properties, and medicinal or economical 
uses. They are not more numerous than was to be expected 
and we are not disposed to make them the subject of 
criticism. 
We may remark, in passing, that, as respects the morphology 
of the androeeium in Fumariacem, the name of the writer 
of the present notice is referred to, by some misconception, 
as adopting Lindley' s well-known hypothesis of the splitting 
of two stamens into halves ; whereas he has maintained a 
very different view. And then this is mentioned as " offering 
a phenomenon of chorisis," which in that view is quite 
incomprehensible to us. 
We were surprised at the statement that the bark and 
leaves of Ham.amelis Virginica " are astringent and contain 
an acrid volatile oil " (p. 207). We trace it back to Lindley's 
"Vegetable Kingdom" (p. 784), and find, " The kernels of 
Ilamamelis Virginica are oily and eatable. The leaves and 
bark are very astringent, and also contain a peculiar acrid 
essential oil ; " and this, we find, comes from Endlicher's 
" Enchiridion." How did this bland and inert plant acquire 
such a reputation ? Dr. Barton, who has figured it, says 
nothing of its possessing any sensible properties or useful 
qualities at all, except its use for divining-rods ; nor do 
Pursh, Bigelow, Elliott, Darlington, etc., allude to any popular 
reputation of such qualities. No sign of any essential 
oil is to be detected in the foliage, and prolonged mastication 
of the leaves and bark while we write yields not the slightest 
trace of acridity and hardly any of astringency ; no more, 
certainly, than a Beech leaf. We never heard of the seeds 
bein"- eaten ; and as they are " about the size of a grain of 
barley," or not much larger, and have a thick bony coat, they 
are not likely to become an important article of diet. After 
some search, we find the source of these extraordinary statements 
in the " Medical Flora " of the eccentric Eafinesque. 
He says the seeds are called Pistachio nuts in the Southern 
States, are rather oily and palatable, etc., but he neglects to 
mention their size. He adds, " The bark and leaves are somewhat 
bitter, very astringent, leaving a sweetish pungent taste. 
The smell is not unpleasant. It has not been analyzed as 
yet, but probably contains tannin, amarine, extractive, and 
an essential oil." To all this, Endlicher, on the strength of 
" the sweetish pungent taste," has added the acridity ; and 
so one of the blandest and most useless of shrubs gets a 
world-wide and wholly factitious reputation for active medical 
qualities and esculent seeds ; and even Dr. Griffith, who 
must have known the shrub, has been induced to give it a 
place in his " Medical Botany." 
Our remaining remark relates to the random way in which 
mere analogies are mixed up with affinities in estimating or 
expressing the relationship of orders, etc., in this as in some 
other more notable works. It is, or at least ought to be, well 
understood, that mere analogy, i. e., likeness in some one respect 
only, however striking the imitation, is no indication of 
relationship, but that relationship rests upon affinity, i. e., 
upon agreement or similarity in the whole plan of structure, 
and especially of floral structure, whether general or particular, 
as the case may be. To speak, therefore, of "evident "and 
"most distinct" affinities between Coniferm and Lycopodiacem 
is an example of this prevalent misconception of what 
affinity is. This is more intelligible, however, than the " approach 
" suggested of Aquifoliacem to Loganiacece and Apocynacem, 
while their resemblance to Gelastracem is thought 
to be of .small account ; or that of Umbelliferm to Rubiacem, 
Saxifragacem, and even to Geraniacem, to which the resemblances 
do indeed " seem rather superficial." Again, Xanthoxylacem 
(i. e., RutaceaP) are said to have considerable 
affinity to Oleaceay because Ptelea, in the former, has a 
samaroid fruit, as has Fraxinus in the latter. May we add, 
as quite as much to the purpose, that the common Xanthoxylums 
have pinnate leaves, and are popularly called Prickly 
Ash? 
The study of affinities is neither guess-work nor divination, 
but a matter of logical deduction from structure, based upon 
scientific principles, — principles recognized and acted upon 
by sound botanists with considerable unanimity, although 
they have never been reduced to a system, nor expounded in 
detail, so as to make them matters of elementary instruction. 
Until this desideratum is supplied, the young botanist can do 
no better than to take as models the writings of Brown, and 
of those botanists who, according to their ability, have most 
closely followed the footsteps of this master in science. 
Having continued this reviesv far beyond our intention at 
the outset, we have small space left for noticing the best part 
of Professor Henfrey' s treatise, namely, the third or Physiological 
part. Suffice it to say, that, in the important chapter 
on the physiological anatomy of plants, our author writes 
from the fullness of his acquaintance with the writings and 
doings of all the continental phytotomists, and also with the 
authority of an experienced original investigator. And, so 
far as we know, it comprises much the best resume of vegetable 
anatomy and development now extant in the English 
language, at once succinct, clear, trustworthy, and well brought 
up to the present state of the science. Perhaps the succeeding 
chapters, on the Physiology of Plants generally, the Physiology 
of Vegetation, and on Reproduction, are equally commendable 
in their way ; but we have as yet barely glanced 
over the pages. We like the following definition, and the 
ensuing paragraph upon the role of vitality in plants. 
" Tlle Physiology of plants is that department of botany in 
which we investigate the phenomena of the life of plants, 
manifested in a series of changes taking place in the diverse 
parts of which each plant is composed " — (p. 475). 
" The physiological phenomena which indicate vitality are 
always of more or less complex nature, and admit of being 
analyzed into a number of factors, of which a large proportion 
are found to be purely physical or chemical. A very 
considerable part of the changes which accompany the process 
of organization are the results of the action of physical and 
chemical forces, [and] capable of being explained up to a 
certain point, by the known laws of those forces. But in 
every case, after referring all the chemical and physical 
phenomena to their respective places, there remains a residual 
phenomenon to be accounted for, which is precisely the most 
important of all, — namely, that in living organic structures 
. . . the laws of inorganic matter are subdued under a higher 
influence, and caused to undergo modifications never occurring 
except in the presence of living matter , while — most 
important of all — the peculiar compounds of matter thus 
produced are not only made to assume forms, according to 
definite laws, totally unlike any forms of mineral matter, but 
[to] constitute bodies manifesting a continued interchange of 
material with the surrounding media, which, instead of resulting 
in decomposition, as in mineral bodies, effects a reproduction 
and increase of the already existing [organized] 
matter"— (p. 542). 
In the paragraph on the longevity of trees (p. 549), we 
find renewed occasion to notice the longevity of unfounded 
statements, copied from one book into another long after the 
error has been pointed out. Here again the Adansonia of 
Senegal and the Wellingtonia or Sequoia of California figure 
as trees " whose age, deduced from the rings of growth of 
the steins, would amount to upwards of 3000 years." There 
is really no evidence to prove that the famous Baobabs described 
by Adanson are of such an age ; and as to the Wellingtonia 
in question, an actual counting of the rings has 
shown that the tree was not half so old as it was vaguely 
computed to be. 
The chapter on Reproduction appears to be excellent, as 
indeed we should expect. The geographical and geological 
part is necessarily very briefly treated. 
NAUDIN ON THE GENUS CUCURBITA. 
Naudin's " Researches into the Specific Characters and the 
Varieties of the Genus Cucurbita " x are published in the 6th 
volume (4th series) of the " Annales des Sciences Naturelles," 
and are of no small interest, being founded upon a very conscientious 
investigation of nearly all the known forms, collected 
for the purpose, and cultivated under the author's eye at the 
Jardin des Plantes. These forms our author reduces to six 
species, and the alimentary sorts in cultivation to three, namely, 
Cucurbita maxima, 0. Pepo, and C. moscliata. The remaining 
three species are 0. melanospcrma of Braun, newly introduced 
from eastern Asia, and the two perennial and tuberous-rooted 
species, 0. perennis and 0. digitata, Gray, natives 
of our southwestern borders, the fruits of which are not 
esculent. Indeed, the Pumpkins and Squashes cultivated in 
Northern Europe, and with us, as now understood, belong to 
only two species, since the third, 0. moschata, hardly comes 
to perfection north of the Mediterranean region. Of these, 
C. maxima is made to include C. Mclopepo ; and C. Pepo, 
comprising our Pumpkins and a large part of our Squashes, 
is made to include 0. ovifera, aurantia, verrucosa, etc., and 
the species are defined by botanical characters, which apparently 
may be relied upon. The varieties of C. maxima 
fall into two main groups, characterized by their fruits, 
namely, the "Turbans," having crowned fruits, that is, the 
summit projecting beyond the adnate calyx-tube, a peculiarity 
found in no other species, and the crownless sorts, in which 
this peculiarity is not manifest. The innumerable varieties 
of 0. Pepo are arranged in seven groups, according to the 
configuration of their fruits. 
M. Naudin has not undertaken to discuss the questions 
respecting the birthplace of these plants. He remarks that 
G. maxima and C. moscliata have been known in European 
gardens scarcely above two centuries ; but that G. Pepo was 
perhaps known to the Greeks and the Romans in the time of 
Pliny. 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxiv. 440. 
The younger De Candolle, in his discussion of the history 
and origin of the principal cultivated plants, which forms 
a most interesting chapter of his " Geographic Botanique," 
although he is unable to assign them to any country as their 
home, confidently (perhaps too confidently) refers all the 
squashes and pumpkins to the Old World ; but not to India, 
because they have no Sanscrit name. He will not believe 
that any of them came from America, and appears to think 
little of the current statements that squashes or pumpkins 
were in cultivation by our aborigines before the European 
settlement of the country. On the other hand, our lamented 
Dr. Harris — who, during the later years of his life, assiduously 
studied this question, and who was very cautious in 
drawing conclusions — had become satisfied that the North 
American Indians, as far north even as to Canada, cultivated 
squashes and pumpkins, one or both, along with their maize, 
before the whites were established here. We are unable at 
this moment to refer to his manuscripts, or to what he had 
too imperfectly published upon this subject. But we well 
remember his laying much stress upon the narrative of 
Champlain ; and with good reason, as it appears to us on 
turning casually to the pages of " Les Voyages du Sieur de 
Champlain . . . ou Journal tres-fidele des Observations f aites 
et Decouvertes de la Nouvelle France," etc., etc., edition of 
Jean Berjon, Baris, 1613, 4to ; also " Voyages et Decouvertes 
faites en la Nouvelle France depuis Tannee 1615, jusques a, la 
fin de Tannee 1618," — second edition, published by Collet in 
1627, small 12mo, —to which volumes we desire to direct 
M. De Candolle's attention. In Champlain's narrative of his 
own voyage along the coast of what is now the State of Maine, 
in the year 1604, and the two voyages of Le Sieur de Mons 
along the coast of New England in 1605 and 1606, Gitrouilles 
and Courges are repeatedly mentioned, along with maize 
{Bled cVlnde) and beans ; e. g. : 
" Nous y vismes force Gitrouilles, courges & petum, qu'ils 
cultiuet aussi. . . . Pour les febues elles comecoiet a entrer 
en fleur, come faysoyct les courges et citrouilles " (p. 68). 
" Ceux que nous auions enuoyes deuers eux, nous appor- 
84 REVIEWS. 
terent des petites citrouilles de la grosseur du poing, que nous 
mangeasmes en sallade comme coucombres, qui sont tresbonnes 
" (p. 77). 
See also pp. 83, 115, 116. Of course it does not follow 
that these esculents were natives of New England, any more 
than maize ; but both may probably have been carried northward 
together. Whatever their origin, our Indians were 
found cultivating them together at this early date as well as 
in later times. According to Nuttall, the Indians along the 
whole Upper Missouri half a century ago were cultivating 
Cucurbita verrucosa. This common squash is, according to 
Naudin, a variety of C. Pepo, as also is C. aurantia (the 
O. Texana vel ovifera, Gray, " PI. Lindheimeriame"), which 
has every appearance of being indigenous in the western part 
of Texas, on the Eio Colorado and its upper tributaries. At 
least, this is the opinion of Mr. Lindheimer and of Mr. Charles 
Wright, two good judges. The latter personally informs us 
that, from the stations and localities in which alone it is met 
with, he could not suspect it to be other than an indigenous 
plant. 
That the later Greeks and Romans possessed the bottle 
gourd or Lagenaria, and also some kind of summer squash, 
seems pretty clear ; but we see no decisive reason for the 
opinion that they had any form of Cucurbita Pepo, as that 
species is now understood. According to De Candolle, the 
earliest figures referable to this species are, one of C. ovifera 
by Lobel in 1576, and one of C. verrucosa by Dalechamp in 
1587, namely, about a century after the discovery of America, 
and long after maize had become well known in the south of 
Europe ; and we have seen that some forms probably of this 
very species (undoubtedly originating in a warmer region) 
had by this time found their way in this country nearly as 
far north as the climate will permit of their cultivation. So 
that there appears to be about the same evidence for the 
American origin of some squashes and of pumpkins that there 
is for the American origin of maize. 
A remaining argument brought by De Candolle against 
this view may also be turned the other way, namely, that no 
certain species of the genus is known as indigenous to America. 
He has equally allowed that none is known to be indigenous 
to the Old World. Now of the six species recognized 
by Naudin, two only are known in their natural wild 
state, and these are our southwestern species with perennial 
roots, namely, C. perennis and C. digitata, to which we add 
that C. Pepo itself (i. e. , C. ovifera or aurantiaP) grows wild 
in the same district with G. perennis, and has the same appearance 
of being indigenous there. We leave the subject with 
these incidental remarks, as we did not intend here to investigate 
this question, and will briefly allude to another subject, 
upon which Naudin's investigations have thrown new light. 
It is generally thought that the cultivated Cucurbitacem, 
and especially that the species of Cucurbita, cross-breed with 
extreme facility. According to Naudin this is true of the races 
only inter se. A good illustration of the immediate and 
great variation from this cause in the fruit of C. Pepo is given 
in Naudin's third plate, where fifteen different forms of the 
fruit are figured, taken from as many individual plants raised 
from seeds of one fruit, which had grown in the vicinity of 
other varieties. It is by no means certain, however, that all. 
these forms originated from direct crossing. But the species 
themselves strangely refuse to hybridize. Naudin carefully 
experimented with the five species in cultivation at the Jardin 
des Plantes (namely, all known, except C. digitata) ; and out 
of seventy distinct trials all but five were utterly ineffectual. 
In five instances the fruit set, indeed, but in none of these 
was a single seed containing the vestige of an embryo produced 
! What are we to think, then, of the universal belief 
that squashes are spoiled by pumpkins grown in their vicinity, 
or pumpkins by squashes ; and even melons (which are of a 
different genus) by squashes? The fact of some such influence 
seems to be well authenticated. Dr. Darlington, one 
of the most trustworthy of observers, speaks of it from his 
own knowledge, thus : " When growing in the vicinity of 
squashes the fruit [of the pumpkin] is liable to be converted 
into a kind of hybrid, of little or no value. I have had a 
crop of pumpkins totally spoiled by that cause, the fruit be- 
coming very hard and warty, unfit for the table and unsafe 
to give to cattle." — ("Fl. Cestrica," ed. 2, p. 555.) 
Now that this is not the effect of hybridation is clear from 
the fact that the result appears in the fruit of the season, 
not in that of the next year, namely, in a generation originated 
by the crossing. A clue is perhaps furnished by Naudin's 
observations, that the ovary is apt to set and even develop 
into a fruit in consequence of the application of the 
pollen of another species, although, as the result proves, none 
of the ovules are fertilized. And he hazards the conjecture 
that the pollen may exert a specific influence first upon the 
ovary, inciting its farther development, and then upon the 
ovules. To test this conjecture he was to examine the action, 
if any there be, of the pollen of Cucurbita upon the ovary of 
melons. The past summer — which has been as unusually 
warm in western Europe as it has been cool in this country 
— must have favored such researches in Paris ; and we may 
expect soon to hear of the result. Improbable as such an 
influence seems to be, it is hardly more so than the now 
authenticated fact that the graft of a variegated variety of a 
shrub or tree will slowly infect the stock, so that the variegation 
will at length break out in the foliage of the natural 
branches ; — an old observation, which, according to the Gardner's 
Chronicle, has recently been verified in several instances. 
WEDDELL'S MONOGRAPH OF URTICACEÆ. 
Dr. Weddell's preliminary studies upon the proper Urticacem 
were published a few years ago in the " Annales des 
Sciences Naturelles." Since then, botanists, aware from this 
and his other works that the subject was in most able hands, 
have been anxiously waiting for his full monograph. This, 
we understand, is now completed, although the last fasciculus 
has not yet reached this country. The greater part is before 
us, and an admirable monograph l it is, worthy of a place in 
1 Monographic de la Famille des Urticees. Par H. A. Weddell {Archives 
du Museum, ix., livr. 1-4), 1850-57. (American Journal of Science and 
Arts, 2 ser., xxv. 109.) 
the " Archives " which contain that model one on the Malpighiacece 
of his lamented botanical master. It illustrates in 
detail about 470 species, under 40 genera, and is accompanied 
by twenty well-filled plates, drawn by the author. It opens 
with a conspectus of the members of the great group to which 
the true Urticacem belong (which the author inclines to receive 
rather as the orders of a class than as suborders of an extensive 
order, fully admitting, however, their close affinity inter 
«e), followed by a brief indication of the principal investigators 
of these plants, and of the resources at his own command. 
A general account of the organs of vegetation and reproduction, 
of the affinities, and the geographical distribution of the 
plants of the group, and of their properties and uses, conclude 
the preliminary matter. The body of the work is occupied 
by their systematic arrangement and description. 
Apetalm being viewed as degenerations of Polypetalm, our 
author searches among the latter orders for the nearest relatives 
of the great Urticaceous order of alliance, and finds 
them in the Tiliacem, that is, in the group of orders of which 
the Malvaceae are the highest development. According to 
Weddell's happy illustration, Malvacem crown the summit of 
a three-sided pyramid, with Sterculiacem, Byttneriacem, and 
Tiliacem just below them, one upon each face ; under the 
Byttneriacem he ranks the Euphorbiacem with the Antidesniem, 
and under these, at the very base of the pyramid, the 
Scepacece, the lowest degradation in this direction of the Malvaceous 
type. On the adjacent face, under the Tiliacem, and 
on the same level with the Euphorbiacem, he inscribes the 
Urticacem., with the Cupuliferm perhaps underneath them. 
Upon this ingenious plan of representation, the apetalous 
orders throughout may be most conveniently and instructively 
ranked under their superior types ; — bearing in mind that 
some types degrade as much within an order (e. g., Euphorbiacem, 
Onaqracem inclusive of Ilaloragem, Caryophyllacem 
including lUecebrcmS), as others do through a series of two or 
three orders, or even as the same group does (e. g., CaryophyllacemS) 
through a series of orders on the other side of the 
pyramid. 
The reason why this mode of representation will exhibit 
botanical affinities so well is, that (as we have elsewhere 
remarked) the vegetable kingdom does not culminate, —as 
the animal kingdom does, — and therefore offers no foundation 
in nature for a lineal arrangement even of its great 
groups. But it would appear that the Dicotyledonous orders 
might be arranged under a considerable number of short 
series, in groups converging upon the most fully developed or 
representative order of each type, so as to exhibit what we 
now know of the system of nature much better than in any 
other way. 
We think that Dr. Weddell's idea of the affinity of Urticacem 
is a good one. The floral and seminal characters, the 
true criteria of affinity, are not abhorrent, but present some 
strong points of relationship, as do the organs of vegetation. 
These, once established, allow us to feel the force of the striking 
coincidence in the bast-tissue of the bark, so remarkable 
in all this alliance for the length, fineness, and toughness of 
the fibres, their union end to end, and their lateral independence, 
admirably adapting them for their use as textile materials, 
in which Urticacem vie with Malvaceae and Tiliacem. 
As to geographical distribution, Europe is very poor in 
Urticacem, poorer even than would at first view be supposed, 
as the author remarks. For as nettles like an enriched soil, 
the five or six European species of Urtica and Parietaria so 
abound around habitations that they make up in the multitude 
of individuals for the paucity of species, and perhaps cover 
nearly as much ground as the great number of intertropical 
species ; two or three excepted, which are also weeds in the 
tropics. Temperate North America is not much richer in 
species than Europe. The greater part are found in the torrid 
zone, and in islands rather than continents ; the Malay region, 
India, Mexico, and the West Indies together possess almost 
two thirds of the known species. 
Our remaining remarks shall be restricted to one wellknown 
plant described in the work, and to another of recent 
discovery, which unfortunately was not communicated in season 
to find a place in it. 
The first is our common Pilea pumila. Dr. Wedded has 
overlooked the fact that Eafinesque had founded a genus 
(Adice or Aclike) upon it, although the name is mentioned in 
the work cited by him, where the plant was first published as 
a Pilea, and although Dr. Torrey had adopted Rafinesque's 
genus, and figured the species, in an earlier and more considerable 
work ("Flora of the State of New York "), which, 
having unfortunately been published by the State, and in a 
large edition, has in consequence remained almost unknown 
to science. Considering that the three sepals of the fertile 
flower in this species are nearly equal and not gibbous, it may 
be doubted whether the single species of Blume's genus Achudemia, 
differing only in having five sepals, should not rather 
be appended to Pilea. We dare say that Dr. Wedded would 
have so arranged it, if Blume had not published the genus. 
Since the appearance of the third part of Weddell's mono- 
graph, but before it had reached this country, Dr. Torrey has 
published, in the report on Dr. Bigelow's fine California collection 
made in Lieutenant Whipple's Eailroad Survey to the 
Pacific, a new Nettle allied to Boehmeria but with the penicillate 
stigma of Urtica, namely, his Ifesperoenide tenella 
(" Pacific Railroad Reports," iv. p. 139). This little plant, it 
now appears, comes nearest to Wight's monotypic genus Chamabaina 
of India, of which better details than Wight's as to 
the female flowers and fruit are figured in the present monograph. 
The stigma is intermediate in character between that 
of Chamabaina and that of Urtica ; and, moreover, as the sepals 
of the male flower want the pointed gibbous tips of the 
former, the stipules are inconspicuous, and the cotyledons are 
not only reniform but (which is unnoticed in the published 
description) pretty strongly emarginate at the summit also, 
the genus will probably be retained. 
Great thanks are due to Dr. Weddell for his labors upon 
this family, which he found in a most unsatisfactory and difficult 
state, and has left in such condition that Nettles and their 
allies are easy and inviting objects of study. 
RADLKOFER'S PROCESS OF FECUNDATION IN THE 
VEGETABLE KINGDOM. 
This gives in English, and in an accessible form, a systematic 
and historical survey of the whole subject of vegetable 
fecundation, including the recent discoveries of Pringsheim, 
Cohn, Braun, and Bary. 
As to Fungi and Lichens, — thanks to the observations of 
Itzigsohn upon the latter, and the most useful and persevering 
investigations of Tulasne upon both families, — the analogues 
of male organs in all probability are discovered, and their 
general presence recognized ; but the fact of fecundation is 
not made out. 
In the lower or green Algm, fecundation was first demonstrated 
by Pringsheim. The " horns " of Vaucheria which 
Vaucher half a century ago observed and conjectured to be 
male organs, Pringsheim proved to be so, having seen them 
open at the summit and emit a great number of free-moving 
corpuscles (spermatozoids), many of which found their way 
into the now open orifice of the protuberance, which contains 
the forming spore, and were seen crowding against it, after 
which a membrane of cellulose appears over the surface of 
the mass of protoplasm and completes the spore. Whether 
one or more of the spermatozoids actually penetrates the 
protoplasm and so is included within the cell-membrane is 
uncertain; but Pringsheim thought it was the case, from 
having detected a colorless corpuscle like one of the spermatozoids 
inside of the membrane. Next Pringsheim demonstrated 
a similar fecundation in CEdogonium. His results, 
briefly published in the proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 
and thence translated into French and English, are now 
given in detail in the first part of his " Jahrbucher," noticed 
above. QSdogonium consists of a row of cylindrical cells. 
1 Der Befruchtungsprocess im Pfianzenreiche. L. Radlkofer. Leipsic, 
1857. (English translation by Arthur Henfrey in Annales and Magazine 
of Natural History, October and November, 1857.) (American Journal 
of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxv. 112.) 
Some of these cells, usually shorter than the rest, become 
tumid, and, without conjugation, have their whole green contents 
transformed into a large spore. Pringsheim has ascertained 
that other cells of the same individual plant have 
their green contents transformed into a multitude of active 
corpuscles or zoospores, which, from their subsequent evolution 
and office, he names androspores ; these escape by the 
opening of the mother cell moving about freely by the vibration 
of a crown of cilia attached near the smaller end. One 
or more of these androspores fix themselves by the smaller 
end upon the surface of the cell in which a large ordinary 
spore is forming, or in the vicinity, and germinate there, 
growing longer and narrower at the point of attachment, 
while near the free end a cross partition forms, and sometimes 
another, making one or two small cells ; this is the true 
antheridium : for in it a crowd of spermatozoids are formed, 
also endowed with motivity by means of vibratile cilia. Now 
the top of the antheridium falls off as a lid, the spermatozoids 
escape ; tho spore-cells at this time open at the top ; one of 
the spermatozoids enters the opening, its pointed end foremost; 
this becomes stationary upon or slightly penetrates 
the surface of the young spore, into which its contents are 
doubtless transferred, and a coat of cellulose is then, and not 
until then, deposited upon it, completing its organization as 
a spore, which in due time germinates, and grows directly into 
a plant like the parent. 
But in Bulbochsete, and especially in Sphseroplea, so beautifully 
investigated by Cohn ("Annales des Sciences Naturelles," 
4 ser.,v.), the spore does not directly develop into the 
normal or fruit-bearing plant. Instead of this, by an alternation 
of generations (to adopt that well understood phrase), the 
spore proceeds to convert its contents by successive division 
into a large number of zoospores, different from the androspores, 
namely, small oval or oblong bodies, furnished with 
two long cilia on a short beak at one end, and for a time moving 
actively about by their vibration. Coming to rest, these 
zoospores germinate, by elongation and the formation of transverse 
partitions, into adult thread-like plants, consisting of a 
row of cells. In Sphseroplea the whole contents of the cells 
of some adult individuals condense into large green spores, 
as yet without a coat ; while those of different individuals 
give rise to myriads of slender spermatozoids, moving by 
moans of a pair of cilia fixed at the narrow end. The latter 
escape from the parent cell through a small perforation which 
now appears, enter the spore-bearing cells of the fertile plant 
through a similar perforation in them, play around the 
spores, and at length one or more of them drives its pointed 
extremity into their naked surface ; after which, fertilization 
being accomplished, a thick coat of cellulose is deposited to 
complete the spore. " Cohn does not consider that observations 
justify his assuming a direct penetration of the spermatozoids 
into the primordial spore-cell. It rather seemed to 
him as if they attached themselves on the outside of the 
spore, and were finally converted into mucilaginous globules." 

Reproduction by conjugation of course had long been 
familiarly known in the lower Algae. But it was questioned 
whether this was really analogous to sexual reproduction, 
since what appeared to be similar spores are often formed of 
the contents of a single cell without conjugation. Areschoug 
shows that these are abortive spores, incapable of germination 
; while those which result from actual conjugation will 
grow into new plants, without further metamorphosis ; Vaucher's 
old observations to this effect having been confirmed 
by Braun and Pringsheim. 
lhat in the Fucacem or olive-green Algce the large spores 
are fecundated by spermatozoids, produced in antheridia, 
was demonstrated by Thuret in the year 1850. And in more 
recent memoirs he has shown that the fertilization takes 
place through direct contact of the spermatozoids with the 
naked surface of the unimpregnated spore, then having only 
a protoplasmic coating ; and that these spores will not develop 
nor hardly acquire a cell-wall unless so fertilized. His 
experiments upon dioecious species are perfectly decisive 
upon these points. He observed the lively spermatozoids 
playing over the surface of the still naked spore, fix them- <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:29:17 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

elaborate plates which illustrate the memoir. It is a clear, 
patient, and philosophical elucidation of an extremely anomalous 
o'roup of plants, and a succinct exposition of the principal 
lessons to be learned from their study, both orgauographically 
and systematically ; and it bears the impress throughout of 
the spirit, freshness, and independence which so distinguish 
. this author, and make all his writings so attractive and instructive. 
While the whole subject is developed in proper 
order the divisions are not quite clearly marked out in the 
essay. The first sectional heading is : "1. Parasitism and 
structure of the Rhizome." But there is no section 2 answering 
to the first, which moreover continues, without a break, 
to treat of the general anatomy, organography, and morphology 
of these plants, the structure of the flowers, ovules, and 
seeds, and of the diverse doctrines which have been propounded 
respecting them. The affinities of Balanophorem are then 
considered under a special heading ; their Classification is 
then the subject of a few general remarks ; also their Geographical 
Distribution and Variation. Then a Synoptical 
Table of the genera is given ; and the fourteen genera with 
their known species (28 in all) are finally described and 
illustrated. 
As to the structure and affinities of Balanophorece, and 
the curious questions that have arisen about their place in the 
natural system, Dr. Hooker, in the first place, affirms them to 
be truly phamogamous. It now seems strange that this should 
ever have been doubted. The arguments to the contrary, says 
our author, " all appear to have originated, on the one hand, 
in mistaking feeble analogies between the forms of organs 
that are not homologous, for affinities ; and, on the other, in 
overlooking a multitude of positive characters. These arguments 
may be summed up as : —1. An erroneous view of the 
nature of the seeds, by Endlicher, Martius, Blume, and others, 
who describe them as a sporulif erous mass, — a term which, 
even if it were applicable, has no meaning. 2. An erroneous 
view of their origin being in a diseased state of the plants 
they grow upon, adopted by Junghuhn and Trattinick. 3. A 
supposed similarity in appearance to Fungi, and an erroneous 
idea that their appearance is meteoric and their growth rapid ; 
— a theory advanced by Endlicher, who says of the horizontal 
rhizome of Helosis and Langsdorffia, ' mycelio Fungorum 
quam maxime analogum.' 4. The resemblance between the 
articulated filaments on the capitula of the Ifelosidem and the 
paraphyses of Musci ; and between the pistils of Bcdanophorem 
and the pistillidia of Mosses ; strongly advocated by 
Griffith and Lindley. 5. The resemblance of the cellular and 
vascular tissues in some of their characters to some of those 
of Ferns, as indicated by Unger and Goeppert. 6. A very 
peculiar view of the nature and relations of the parts of the 
female flower entertained by Weddell ; who hence considers 
Balanophorem (together with Rafflesiacem) to approach 
nearer to Gymnosperms than to any other group of plants." 
Instead of discussing at length opinions which "had the 
authors who advocate them been sufficiently furnished with 
specimens and facts they would never have entertained," Dr. 
Hooker merely recalls attention to the essential facts that 
these plants exhibit true flowers with stamens and pistils, genuine 
ovules, and even embryo, and so accord in no one particular 
with Cryptogams. He shows moreover that the embryo 
is dicotyledonous in the few cases where it is sufficiently developed 
to manifest the character, and that the stem is constructed 
upon the exogenous plan. Even with these facts 
before him, Lindley has retained his Ehizogens, as " logically 
a class " ; as an intermediate form of organization between 
Endogens and Thallogens, and characterized by vegetation 
rather than fructification. But there is little or nothing really 
peculiar in their vegetation ; and, as Lindley himself reduces 
the differences to questions of degree, it suffices to say that 
the classes are not founded upon degradation of type, but 
upon change of type. 
Viewing Balanophorem, then, as degraded members of the 
Dicotyledonous class, Dr. Hooker follows Brown and Griffith 
in regarding Rafflesiacem as near to Aristolochiacem, and in 
denying all affinity between these and Balanophorem. In 
searching for the affinities of the latter, Dr. Hooker is guided 
by the sound rule of disregarding " the negative characters, 
as those may be termed which are founded on the imperfections 
of organs ; " and he takes the most perfectly developed 
species as the best exponents of the typical structure of any 
group, — a principle laid down, we believe, by Mr. Brown. 
This gives a substantial scientific basis for the estimation of 
affinity. Agreement in plan of structure is just what constitutes 
affinity ; agreement in grade of evolution may indicate 
only distant analogy, can indicate only collateral relationship, 
no t to be neglected, indeed, but in itself of no account 
in assigning a family to its true position in a system. The 
principle as applied in the present case leads Dr. Hooker to 
the conclusion that the nearest relatives of Balanophorem are 
the Ilcloragem, a group itself, " consisting for the most part 
of reduced forms of Onagrariem," or, more strictly speaking, 
that the link which connects these plants with the higher 
forms of vegetation is furnished by Gunnera. The qualifying 
phrase above is appropriate ; for it is hard to conceive of 
Gunnera with its minute embryo as a reduced Onagracea, 
while it is impossible to sever the chain of evidence which 
binds the genus to Loudonia and Haloragis. Be this as it 
may, Dr. Hooker has surely made a happy hit in seizing upon 
Gunnera as the key to the true affinities of Balanophorem. 
Of all the objections that may be urged against this approximation 
not the strongest, but rather the least valid, in our 
opinion (so long as the question is one of alliance and not of 
co-ordination), is that to be derived from the habit and the 
imperfection of the foliar organs. Any type is liable to have 
its parasitic phase, and this is generally a degraded one in 
these respects ; the Gesneriaceous has it in Orbanchem, which 
it might with the greatest propriety include ; the Scrophulariaceous 
graduates insensibly into similar parasitic forms ; the 
Ericaceous has them in Monotropem ; and the Cornaceous 
or Olacaceous degrades through Santalacem into Loranthacece. 

It is quite probable that our author would deny the degradation 
in the latter case, judging from some points which he 
makes wdien considering whether the group of Balanophorem, 
" putting aside any consideration of its relationship with other 
orders, and regarding it per se, . . . should abstractedly be 
considered as ranking high, or the contrary." This is an abstraction 
of which we are hardly capable, — that of determining 
the rank of an order per se. Still our author's ideas are 
clear and clearly expressed ; the comparison is really between 
these plants and the ideal plant-type. And what is wanting 
to make the comparison practical is a settled idea as to what 
constitutes the highest style of plant, and what is the relative 
importance of deviations from it ; questions too large to be entered 
upon here, if indeed the science is yet ready for their discussion, 
but which underlie the most important inquiries which 
good systematic botanists are everywhere tentatively prosecuting. 
Assuming that the conventional definition of perfection 
in use among zoologists is applicable to the vegetable kingdom, 
and which argues that a high degree of specification of 
organs and morphological differentiation of them for the performance 
of the highest functions indicate a high rank, Dr. 
Hooker ingeniously argues that " Balanophorem may in some 
respects be considered to hold a very high one ; " and the points 
are presented under seven heads. Now we will not deny that 
the principles are logically applied in the present case, nor that 
the considerations of the kind are perhaps as applicable to 
the vegetable as to the animal kingdom. But we should 
a priori expect that principles of fundamental importance in 
the latter could have no sound application to the former ; that 
even such as relate to functions common to the two, or to 
structures analogous, would require to be based each upon its 
own ground. As to morphology, and as to what constitutes 
perfection of type, we should look to the fundamental differences 
rather than to the resemblances of the two for our start- 
ing-point. 
Plants for obvious reasons are constructed on the principle 
of extension of surface. Concentration or consolidation, wherever 
it occurs in the vegetable kingdom, is a special provision 
against some peculiar danger. Animals, on the contrary, are 
formed on the principle of restriction of surface. As if to 
withdraw them as much as practicable from the direct action 
of the external world, their shape is compact, their extent as 
individuals strictly limited, the external organs by which they 
take their sustenance comparatively few and small, while the 
most essential organs are safely sheltered within. Consolidation 
of organs and even their restriction in number, accordingly, 
are not likely to be indications of high rank in the 
vegetable kingdom. Not the latter, because the object of the 
plant in vegetation is attained by the indefinite repetition of the 
same organs ; nor the former, for the type of the plant is realized 
only in the distinct elimination of leaves from the axis. 
A Melon-Cactus and a Cuscuta are low forms of plants as 
to vegetation. As it is a fundamental character of plants 
that their organs of reproduction are only specialized organs 
of vegetation ; as the higher great divisions of plants are 
those in which the leaf-type is most apparent throughout ; as 
the perfect accomplishment of the end in view — the production, 
protection, and nourishment of the embryo even of the 
highest or most developed kind — does not require the confluence 
of homogeneous parts, why should such confluence be 
regarded as indicating higher rank, merely because the type 
is more disguised in such cases ? We see no sufficient ground 
for ranking a monopetalous plant higher than a polypetalous 
one on that account ; and still less for regarding a Loranthus 
or a Viscum as the highest style of plant. On the contrary, 
we incline to look upon the consolidation of heterogeneous 
parts in the blossom not as high specialization at all, but as 
want of development, i. e. imperfect elimination ; and in this 
light those who maintain an inferior ovary to be one immersed 
m a receptacle, must needs regard it. 
Again, suppression or abortion of organs that belong to the 
type of the blossom cannot be considered as other than an 
imperfection, although the loss of the corolla is no great matter, 
and the abortion of one of the sexes little more. Still 
hermaphroditism is plainly in the type of the highest style of 
plant ; while the opposite is the case in the animal kingdom. 
But we cannot here enter further into the discussion of this 
class of questions. No one feels more deeply than our author 
the want of fixed and philosophical principles for the subordination 
of characters and the study of affinities in plants ; 
and no botanist of his age is more competent, or so well 
placed and furnished for the investigation of this problem, to 
which we invite him as to a task worthy of his powers. 
As to the rank of Balanophorem, if our author has demonstrated 
anything, it is that they belong to the highest class of 
plants, but that they are probably the most degraded members 
of it. 
BOUSSINGAULT ON THE INFLUENCE OF NITRATES 
ON THE PRODUCTION OF VEGETABLE MATTER. 
Several years ago Boussingault demonstrated, in the 
clearest way, that plants are incapable of assimilating the 
free nitrogen of the atmosphere. Two years ago, in a paper 
communicated to the French Academy of Sciences, he showed 
that nitrates eminently favor vegetation. He now shows, 1 
by decisive experiments, — 
(1) That the amount even of ternary vegetable matter 
produced by a plant depends absolutely upon the supply of 
assimilable nitrogen (ammonia and nitrates). A plant, such 
as a sunflower, with a rather large seed, may grow in a 
soil of recently calcined brick, watered with pure water, so 
far as even to complete itself with a blossom ; but it will only 
have trebled or quadrupled the amount of vegetable matter 
it had to begin with in the seed. In the experiments, the 
seeds weighing 0.107 grams, in three months of vegetation 
formed plants which when dried weighed only 0.392 grams, 
— a little more than trebling their weight. The carbon they 
had acquired from the decomposition of carbonic acid of the 
air was only 0.114 grams ; the nitrogen they had assimilated 
from the air in three months was only 0.0025 grams. 
(2) Phosphate of lime, alkaline salts, and earthy matters 
1 Researches upon the Influence which assimilable Nitrogen in manures 
exerts upon the production of Vegetable Matter; and (2) Upon the Quantity 
of Nitrates contained in the Soil and in Water of various kinds. J. B. J. D. 
Boussingault. Annates des Sciences Naturelles, 4 ser., vii., No. 1, 1857. 
(American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxv. 120.) 
indispensable to the constitution of plants exert no appreciable 
action upon vegetation, except when accompanied by 
matters capable of furnishing assimilable nitrogen. Tw r o 
plants of the same kind, grown under the same conditions as 
above, but with the perfectly sterile soil adequately supplied 
with phosphate of lime, alkali in the form of bicarbonate of 
potash, and silex from the ashes of grasses, resulted in only 
0.498 grams of dried vegetable matter, from seeds weighing 
0.107 grams ; and had acquired only 0.0027 grams of nitrogen 
beyond what was in the seeds. 
(3) But nitrate of potash furnishing assimilable nitrogen, 
associated with phosphate of lime and silicate of potash, 
forms a complete manure, and suffices for the full development 
of vegetation. Parallel experiments with nitrate in 
place of bicarbonate of potash resulted in the vigorous growth 
of the Sunflower plants, and the formation of 21.248 grams of 
organic matter, from seeds weighing as before only 0.107. 
This 21.111 grams of new vegetable matter, produced in three 
months of vegetation, contained 8.444 of carbon derived from 
the carbonic acid of the air and 0.1666 grams of nitrogen. 
The 1.4 grams of nitrate of potash supplied to the soil contained 
0.1969 grams of nitrogen, leaving a balance of 0.0303, 
nearly all of which was found unappropriated in the soil. 
Finally Boussingault made a neat series of comparative 
experiments, introducing into calcined sand the same amount 
of phosphate of lime and carbonate of potash, but different 
proportions of nitrate of soda, or in other words of assimilable 
nitrogen, and watering with water free from ammonia 
but containing a quarter of its volume of carbonic acid. The 
soil was divided among four pots, each having two seeds of 
Sunflower {IT. argophyllus was the species used in all the experiments) 
; the pot 
No. 1 received of nitrate of soda 0.00 grams. 
No. 2 " " " 0.02 « 
No. 3 " " " 0.04 " 
No. 4 " " " 0.16 " 
The results of fifty days' vegetation are given in the rate 
of growth, size and number of leaves, weight of the product, 
etc. : — 
No. 1 made of new vegetable matter . . . 0.397 grams. 
No. 2 " " "... 0.720 " 
No. 3 " " "... 1.130 " 
No. 4 " " "... 3.280 " 
In No. 2 so little as three milligrams of assimilable nitrogen 
introduced into the soil enabled the plant to double the 
amount of organic matter. The proportion of the weight of 
the seeds to that of the plant formed was in 
No. 1, as 1 : 4.6 grams. 
No. 2, as 1 : 7.6 
1 : 7.6 
No. 3, as . 1 : 11.3 
No. 4, as . 1 : 30.8 
In no case did the nitrogen acquired by the plant exceed 
that of the nitrate added to the soil. 
In the experiments where no nitrate was added to the soil 
the two or three milligrams of nitrogen acquired by the plants 
during three months of vegetation came in all probability from 
ammoniacal vapors and nitrates existing or formed in the atmosphere. 
To establish their presence, Boussingault arranged 
an apparatus which detected the production of some nitrates. 
And, in exposing to the air 500 grams of calcined sand, which 
had 10 grams of oxalic acid mixed with it, in a glass vessel 
with an open surface equal to that of one of the flower-pots 
used in the above experiments, the sand took 0.0013 grams of 
nitrogen from the air, of which a part was certainly ammonia. 
The object of the researches of which a summary is given 
in the second paper was, to determine the quantity of nitrates 
contained, at a given moment, in one hectare of cultivated 
ground, one of meadow, one of the forest soil, and in one metre 
of river or spring water. The quantity in the soil was of course 
found to vary extremely with the extremes of wet or dry 
weather. Garden soil, highly manured every autumn, contained 
on the 9th of August, 1856, after fourteen dry and 
warm days, 316.5 grams of nitre in a cubic litre of soil. On 
the 29th of the month, after twenty rainy days, the same quan- 
102 REVIEWS. 
tity of the same soil contained only 13 grams of nitre. The 
greater part had been dissolved out of the superficial soil. 
Some specimens of forest-soil, in a state of nature, furnished 
no indication of nitrates ; others gave 0.7 and 3.27 
grams of nitre to the cubic metre. 
The soil of meadows and pastures afforded from 1 to 11 
grams of nitre to the cubic metre. Nineteen specimens of 
good cultivated land gave, four of them none ; others from 
0.8 to 1.33 ; the richer ones from 10.4 to 14.4, and one 
fallow, of exceptional richness, as much as 108 grams of nitre 
to the cubic metre. To the latter much calcareous matter 
has been added. 
The soil of the conservatory, from which the nitrates would 
not be washed away by rains, contained 89, or 161, and some 
rather deep soil 185 grams of nitre to the cubic metre. 
The sources of the nitre are not difficult to understand 
when we reflect that a manured soil, especially a calcareous 
one, is just in the condition of an artificial nitre-bed. The 
ultimate result of the decomposition of ordinary manure is a 
residuum of alkaline and earthy salts, phosphates, and nitrates, 
the latter, with the ammonia furnishing the assimilable 
nitrogen, all-essential to productive vegetation. In incorporating 
with the soil undecomposed manure, instead of 
the ultimate results of decomposition, less loss is suffered from 
prolonged rains wasting out the formed nitrates. 
The soluble matters washed out of the soil are to be sought 
in the water. Eiver and spring waters therefore act as manure 
by the silex and alkali, the organic matter, and the nitrates 
which they hold. The spring waters, poorest in nitre of 
those examined, contained from 0.03 to 0.14 milligrams of 
nitre to the litre ; the richer ones from 11 to 14 grams in 
the cubic metre. 
As to the river-water, the Vesle in Champagne held 12 
grams, the Seine at Paris 9 grams the cubic metre. These 
were the richest. The Seine at Paris carries to the sea, in 
times of low water, 58,000 kilograms, in times of high water, 
194,000 kilograms, of nitre every twenty-four hours. What 
enormous amounts of nitre must be carried into the sea by the 
Mississippi, the Amazon, and by every great continental river; 
and how active, beyond all ordinary conception, must the 
process of nitrification be all over the land ; and how vast the 
supply of assimilable nitrogen for the use of vegetation ! 
BENTHAM'S HAND-BOOK OF THE BRITISH FLORA. 
ONE of the best systematic botanists — of the soundest 
judgment and the largest experience, both in European and 
exotic botany — has deemed it no unfit employment of a portion 
of his valuable time to prepare a volume 1 by which 
beginners, having no previous acquaintance with the science, 
may learn to know most advantageously and readily, the wild 
flowers and plants of his native land. The result is a genuine 
popular Flora, and a clear proof that the plants of a limited 
country may be described, by one who understands them thoroughly, 
in comparatively simple language, without any sacrifice 
of scientific accuracy, or of scientific, interest. No really 
good work of this kind was ever made by a compiler ; and no 
one who has not essayed the task, can comprehend how thoroughly 
faithful writing for beginners brings one's knowledge 
to the proof. 
The characteristic features of the work before us are : 1. 
The full use of analytical keys, after the mode of De Candolle's 
" Flora Francaise," leading easily not only to the order 
and the genus, but also to the species of the plant in hand. 
These keys, or analyses, are here made to supersede specific 
characters as such, neat and free in descriptions, longer or 
shorter according to circumstances, occupying their place. 
But generic characters are given with considerable fullness. 
2. The exclusion of all technical terms which were not required 
for the purpose in view, and " the omission, in numerous 
instances, of microscopical, anatomical, or theoretical 
1 Hand-book of the British Flora; a Description of the Flowering Plants 
and Ferns indigenous to, or naturalized in, the British Isles : for the use of 
Beginners and Amateurs. By George Bentham. London, 1858. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxvi. 413.) 
characters, often of the greatest importance in scientific 
botany, but useless to the mere amateur." 3. The descriptions 
are original, and have been drawn up from British 
specimens in the first instance, and afterwards compared with 
the characters given in the standard Floras, and verified upon 
continental specimens from various parts of the geographical 
range of the species. As a describer of species (which is 
something very different from a describer of specimens), Mr. 
Bentham has no superior. 4. The geographical range of each 
species, at least its European range, is carefully specified; 
then the British stations are given in general terms, the object 
being to state where the plant is likely to be found, rather 
than to indicate the precise spot where it has been gathered. 
5. The judicious limitation of species, and the reduction of a 
crowd of nominal or " critical " species to their supposed types, 
with a thoroughness which only a botanist of Mr. Bentham's 
great experience and authority could well venture upon. The 
following extract from the preface will explain his views : — 
" Taking into account the omission of all plants erroneously 
indicated as British, it will still, no doubt, be a matter of 
astonishment that, whilst the last edition of Hooker and 
Arnott's Flora contains 1571 species, and that of Babington's 
Manual as many as 1708 (exclusive of Chara), the number, 
in the present work, is reduced to 1285. This is not owing 
to any real difference of opinion as to the richness and diversity 
of our vegetable productions, but is occasioned by a 
different appreciation of the value of the species themselves. 
The author has long been persuaded that the views originally 
entertained by Linnaeus, of what really constitutes a species, 
were far more correct than the limited sense to which many 
modern botanists seem inclined to restrict the term ; and that 
in most cases where that great master had good means of 
observation, he succeeded admirably in the practical application 
of his principles. At any rate, if those minute distinctions 
by which the innumerable varieties of Brambles, of Roses, of 
Hawk-weeds, or of Willows, have of late years been characterized, 
are really more constant and more important than 
the author's experience has led him to conclude, they cannot 
be understood without a more complete acquaintance with 
trifling, vague, and sometimes theoretical characters, than he 
has himself been able to attain, or than can ever be expected 
from the mere amateur. . . . The species are limited according 
to what are conceived to have been the original principles 
of Linnteus : and the author, in submitting his views to the 
judgment of the scientific world, trusts that they will not be 
attributed to hasty generalizations, or conjectural theories, but 
that they will be generally recognized as founded on personal 
observation of living plants, made during many years' residence 
on the continent, as well as in this country, and on 
repeated comparison of specimens collected from the most 
varied and distant points of the geographical areas of the 
several species." 
6. Popular names are employed and reduced to a system 
in accordance with the principles of botanical nomenclature. 
" An attempt has, on the present occasion, been made to give 
prominence to a series of English names to the British plants, 
rendering them as far as possible consistent with the recognized 
principles of systematic nomenclature, so essential for 
the study of plants. It was at first intended merely to have 
adopted those which are appended to all the genera and 
species in Hooker and Arnott's Flora ; but the first attempts 
to apply them practically, gave evidence that they had never 
been framed with a view to being used by botanists, or amateurs, 
in the place of the Latin ones. It will be observed 
that there is among them a continual confusion between popular, 
trivial, and generic names ; between epithets and specific 
names ; between substantives and adjectives ; that on frequent 
occasions one name is applied to several genera, or several 
names to one genus ; that the number of words forming the 
name of a plant varies from one to five, instead of being constantly 
two ; and that some of the names put forward as English, 
are very local, almost unknown or obsolete, and no easier 
to learn than the more useful Latin ones they represent. It 
became necessary, therefore, thoroughly to revise the whole 
system, and to recast it upon the Linnasan principles univer- 
sally adopted for the Latin botanical names. . . . The full 
statement of the principles which have induced the rejection 
of certain names, and the substitution of others, and the 
details of their application to individual cases, . . . are given 
at length in a paper prepared by the author, to be laid before 
the LimiEean Society on the publication of this Flora." 
Criticism may well be deferred until this paper comes to 
hand. Of the propriety of an English nomenclature of some 
kind in a Flora where a great part of the plants have wellknown 
vernacular names, there is no room for doubt ; and if 
used at all, it is desirable that these names should be reduced 
to a systematic form. This is readily done for perhaps half 
of the common plants of the British Flora ; but for the rest, 
the difficulties are various and much greater than one would 
imagine before making the attempt. The present undertaking 
must be deemed a decided success. What imperfections 
it has, are on the safer side. We should have inclined to 
a larger use of the vernacular for the generic names ; and 
where they were inapplicable to the whole genera, to apply 
them to subgenera, e. g., Apple and Pear, Gooseberry and 
Currant. As these are real and universal English generic 
names, they ought, if possible, to be given as such. Still we 
appreciate the reasons which appear to have compelled the 
adoption of Pyrus and Eibes as English names, though English 
they never can become. Our author is strongly disposed 
throughout to make the Latin name do duty as an English 
one, doubtless supposing that they may become popular appellations 
in time, as Geranium and Aster have done. Sometimes 
he adopts the Latin word entire : sometimes he truncates 
or anglicizes the termination. Happy instances of the 
latter sort are : — 
Trigonel, from Trigonella. 
Limosel, from Limosella. 
Corydal, from Corydalis. 
Corrigiole, from Corrigiola. 
Chrysosplene, from Chrysosplenium ; but why not Goldenspleen 
? 
Samole, from Samolus ; but why not Brookweed ? 
Limnanth, from Limnanthemum. 
Scleranth, from Scleranthus ; but why not Knawel ? 
Osmund, from Osmunda. 
Myriophyll, from Myriophyllum ; but why not Milfoil ? 
Matricary, for Matricaria. 
Eupatory, for Eupatorium, etc. 
Those names which are not at all to our tastes are : — 
Cerast, for Cerastium ; but if such a word must be coined, 
why not Holost, for Holosteum on the preceding page ? 
Doronic, for Doronicum. 
Onopord, for Onopordon ; why not Cotton-Thistle ? 
Polycarp (newly martyred), for Polycarpon. 
Myosote, for Myosotis ; in place of Forget-me-not. 
Capsell, for Capsella ; in the place of the vernacular Shep- 
herd's-purse. 
The best coinage of an English name is Eockcist for Helianthemum. 

An Introduction of thirty-six pages teaches the elements of 
botany to beginners, and explains the technical terms used in 
the flora, and many besides. The definitions of perigynous 
and epigynous, however conformable to etymology, are not 
the quite usual ones, and are not adhered to in the work 
itself. We were not aware that "in general the word ovary 
is used to designate all the ovaries of a flower," unless when 
united into one body, and are glad to observe that the author 
does not use the word in this way in the body of the work, 
one or two instances excepted. We always supposed the 
word to be an exact synonym of the Linnsean germen. And 
if we may not use it, as botanists always have done, for the 
ovule-bearing portion of the pistil, whether simple or compound 
(reserving carpel for the simple of elementary pistil, 
whether separate or combined), then a new word must needs 
be coined for this very purpose. To mistake the radicle of 
the embryo for the root, is common to all English botanists. 
The short sections upon classification and the examination 
and determination of plants, are full of practical wisdom. 
VILMORIN'S IMPROVEMENT OF CULTIVATED 
PLANTS. 
This very interesting pamphlet l is a collection and reprint 
of several of Louis Vilmorin's important communications to 
the Central Agricultural Society of France and to the Academy 
of Sciences : to which is prefixed a French translation 
of a memoir upon the Amelioration of the Wild Carrot, contributed 
by his venerable father to the Transactions of the 
London Horticultural Society (but not before published in 
the vernacular of the author), which memoir, as the younger 
Vilmorin informs us, was the point of departure for his own 
investigations in this field, and even contains the germ of 
most of the ideas which he has since developed upon the theory 
of the amelioration of the plants from the seed. These 
papers claim the attention of the philosophical naturalist, no 
less than of the practical horticulturalist. 
Most of our esculents are deviations from the natural state 
of the species, which have arisen under the care and labor of 
man in very early times. New varieties of these cultivated 
races are originated almost every year, indeed ; but between 
these particular varieties, the differences, however well 
marked, are not to be compared for importance with those 
changes which the wild plant has generally undergone in 
assuming the esculent state. In this amelioration or alteration, 
as in other cases, c'est la premiere pas qui coute. For 
the altered race, once originated, has more stability than the 
wild stock ; it accordingly tends not only to degenerate (as 
the cultivator would term it) towards its original and less 
useful state, but also to sport into new deviations, in various 
directions, with a freedom and facility not manifested by its 
wild ancestors. This explains the readiness with which we 
continually obtain new varieties of those esculent plants which 
have been a long time in cultivation, while a newly-introduced 
1 Notice sur I' Amelioration des Plantes par le Semis et Considerations 
sur VHeredite dans les Vegetaux. Par M. Louis Vilmorin. Paris, 1859. 
(American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxvii. 440.) 
plant exhibits little flexibility. To detect the earliest indications 
of sporting, and to select for the parents of the new race 
those individuals which begin to vary in the requisite direction, 
is the part of the scientific cultivator. In this way, the 
elder Vilmorin succeeded in producing the esculent carrot 
from the wild stock in the course of three generations, — no 
addition to our resources, indeed, but significant of what may 
be done by art directed by science. By adopting and skillfully 
applying these principles, the younger Vilmorin has conferred 
a benefit upon France which (if she will continue to 
make sugar from the beet) may almost be compared with that 
of causing two blades of grass to grow where only one grew 
before, having, so to say, created a race of beets containing 
twice as much sugar as their ancestors, and indicated the 
practicability of its perpetuation. The mode of procedure, 
and the ingenious methods he contrived for rapidly selecting 
the most saccharine out of a whole crop of beets, as seed-bearers 
for the next season, are detailed in these papers. 
Once originated, and established by selection and segregation 
for a few generations, the race becomes fixed and perpetuable 
in cultivation, with proper care against intermixture, 
in virtue of the most fundamental of organic laws, namely, 
that the offspring shall inherit the characteristics of the 
parent, —of which law that of the general permanence of 
species is one of the consequences. The desideratum in the 
production of a race is, how to initiate the deviation. The 
divellent force, or idiosyncrasy, the source of that " infinite 
variety in unity which characterizes the works of the Creator," 
though ever active in all organisms, is commonly limited in its 
practical results to the production of those slighter differences 
which ensure that no two descendants of the same parent 
shall be just alike, being overborne by that opposite or centripetal 
force, whatever it be, which ensures the particular resemblance 
of offspring to parents. Now the latter force, as 
Mr. Louis Vilmorin has well remarked, is really an aggregation 
of forces, composed of the individual attraction of a series 
of ancestors, which we may regard as the attraction of the 
type of the species, and which we perceive is generally all- 
powerful. There is also the attraction or influence of the immediate 
parent, less powerful than the aggregate of the ancestry, 
but more close, which ever tends to impress upon the offspring 
all the parental peculiarities. So, when the parent has 
no salient individual characteristics, both the longer and the 
shorter lines of force are parallel, and combine to produce the 
same result. But whenever the immediate parent deviates 
from the type, its influence upon its offspring is no longer 
parallel with that of the ancestry ; so the tendency of the offspring 
to vary no longer radiates around the type of the 
species as a centre, but around some point upon the line which 
represents the amount of its deviation from the type. Left 
to themselves, as Mr. Vilmorin proceeds to remark, such varieties 
mostly perish in the vast number of individuals which 
annually disappear, — or else, we may add, are obliterated in 
the next generation through cross-fertilization by pollen of the 
surrounding individuals of the typical sort, — whence results 
the general fixity of species in Nature. But under man's 
protecting care they are preserved and multiplied, perhaps 
still further modified, and the better sorts fixed by selection 
and segregation. 
Keeping these principles in view, Mr. Vilmorin concluded 
that, in order to obtain varieties of any particular sort, his 
first endeavor should be to elicit variation in any direction 
whatever ; that is, he selected his seed simply from those individuals 
which differed most from the type of the species, 
however unlike the state it was desired to originate. Repeating 
this in the second, third, and the succeeding generations, 
the resulting plants were found to have a tendency to vary 
widely, as was anticipated ; being loosed, as it were, from the 
ancestral influence, which no longer acted upon a straight 
and continuous line, but upon one broken and interrupted 
by the opposing action of the immediate parents and grandparents. 
Thus confused by the contrariety of its inherited 
tendencies, it is the more free to sport in various ways ; and 
we have only to select those variations which manifest the 
qualities desired, as the progenitors of the new race, and to 
develop and fix the product by selection upon the same principle 
continued for several generations. 
It is in this way that Mr. Vilmorin supposes cross-fertilization 
to operate in the production of new varieties ; and even 
in the crossing of two distinct species, the result, he thinks, is 
rarely, if ever, the production of a fertile hybrid, but of an 
offspring which, thus powerfully impressed by the strange 
fertilization and rendered productive by the pollen of its own 
female parent, is then most likely to give origin to a new race. 
We cannot follow out this interesting but rather recondite 
subject in a brief article like this. But we are naturally led 
to inquire whether the history of those plants with which man 
has had most to do, and the study of the laws which regulate 
the production and perpetuation of domesticated races, may 
not throw some light upon the production of varieties in Nature 
; and whether races may not have naturally originated, 
occasionally, under circumstances equivalent to artificial selection 
and segregation. Some recent attempts which have been 
made in this direction we may hope to notice upon another 
occasion. 
THE BUFFALO-GRASS. 
The Buffalo-Grass, 1 so abundant and so widely diffused 
over the broad, arid region which separates our Pacific from 
our Atlantic possessions, is one of the humblest plants of its 
order, rising only a few inches above the surface of the soil ; 
but at the same time it is one of the most important and useful, 
since it forms the principal subsistence of the buffalo for 
a part of the year, and no less so of the cattle of the emigrant. 
The botanical history of this little grass, now happily completed 
by Dr. Engelmann, is remarkable. Nuttall first named 
and described it nearly thirty years ago ; and, while he referred 
it to Sesleria, suspected it to be sui generis, and threw 
1 Two new Genera of Dioecious Grasses of the United States. By George 
Engelmann, M. D. Extr. from the Transactions of the Academy of Natural 
Sciences of St. Louis, i. p. 431 ; with three plates. 1859. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxviii. 439.) 
out a happy conjecture as to its natural relationship. Torrey 
figured it twelve years ago, and also announced its affinity to 
the Chloridece ; he at the same time discovered its dioecious 
character, and showed that only the male plant was known. 
At length Dr. Engelmann has detected the female plant in 
a rather rare grass, the Anthephora axilliflora of Steudel, 
which is so unlike the common Buffalo-Grass that it naturally 
had been referred to a widely different tribe. Struck by the 
similarity of their foliage and stoloniferous growth, as they 
occurred together in a collection made by his brother, Dr. 
Engelmann shrewdly suspected the relationship, and finally 
set the question at rest by finding a male Buffalo-Grass which 
happened to bear a stalk of female flowers from the same rootstock 
; and these flowers were those of the so-called Anthephora. 
So different are the two that nothing short of this 
ocular proof would have been convincing. It hardly need be 
said that the male plant is not a Sesleria, nor the female an 
Anthephora ; although they severally resemble these genera, 
or at least the female spikelets have a very great external resemblance 
to the Paniceous genus Anthephora. So that Dr. 
Engelmann, having to characterize this new generic type, very 
naturally named it Buchloe (shorter and more euphonious 
than Bubalochloe), i. c. Buffalo-Grass ; and he retained the 
specific appellation of Dactyloides, although the male plant 
is not much like a Dactylis, and the female wholly unlike. 
Very glad we are to see the genus established under so appropriate 
a name, — the more so as it has narrowly escaped a 
different fate. That is to say, two inchoate attempts seem to 
have been made to found a genus upon the male sex. First, 
in Sir William Hooker's enumeration of the plants of Geyer's 
western collection we find " Calanthera dactyloides. Kth. — 
Nutt. Sesleria, Nutt. Gen. i. p. 65." But neither Kunth nor 
any other author has described a genus Calanthera. We have 
a suspicion that the " Kth." is a slip of the pen, and that the 
name is really Nuttall's, given by him to a specimen in the 
Hookerian herbarium. But if this be so, the manuscript 
name (which, moreover, is destitute of any particular sio-nifi. 
cance) can by no means now supersede Engelmann's published 
one ; though we might have been constrained by courtesy to 
adopt it, if this suspicion had occurred to him, and he had 
been able to confirm it. Again, in the corrections at the 
close of the "Plants Hartwegianas," Mr. Bentham applies the 
name of "Lasiostega humilis, Rupprecht (ined.) " to No. 
250, which he had before called a Triodia. The plant is undoubtedly 
a male Buffalo-Grass. But no genus Lasiostega is 
found to be published, nor has this name any appropriateness 
as applied to the plant in question. 
It is curious to remark that the male plant, being more 
proliferous by stolons than the female, has nearly displaced 
the latter, or has (so far as known) attained a wider geographical 
range as well as a far greater abundance. Probably, 
in accordance with a general law, the tendency to barrenness 
from seed which accompanies copious multiplication 
by offshoots, has also assisted in the production of this result, 
a state of things quite contrary to the genius of that 
polygamous community which has effected a lodgment in 
the region of Buffalo-Grass. 
Dr. Engelmann's second genus, Monanthochloe, is founded 
upon a singular, exceedingly stoloniferous, littoral grass with 
leaves scarcely half an inch long, with solitary sessile spikelets, 
which has long been known to occur on the coast of 
Texas and Florida (collected by Berlandier, Drummoncl, and 
Blodgett), but has never been studied until now. In fact, 
it has been thought to be something abnormal, on account of 
its showing as its most interesting feature, a regular transition 
from the foliage to the paleto of the flowers. Dr. Engelmann 
notes that the glumes are wanting (perhaps represented by 
ordinary leaves of the axis of which the spikelet is a direct 
continuation), the uppermost leaf representing the lowest 
palea of the spikelet. The latter consists of from three to 
five flowers, of which the lowest flower and sometimes the 
next are neutral or rudimentary, from one to three succeeding 
ones are staminiferous or pistilliferous, according to the 
sex, and the uppermost is also reduced to a rudiment. In 
the hands of agrostologists such a grass as this will be likely 
further to elucidate the floral structure of the order, the 
theory of which is by no means settled yet. Dr. Engelmann's 
three excellent plates, displaying all the details of 
the flowers, will facilitate this investigation. 
The vouthf id Academy of Natural Sciences of St. Louis 
is well inaugurating its public career by publications of such 
character as this paper, and the more elaborate "Monograph 
of Cuscuta " by the same author, which is now in press. 
THE TREES OF NORTH CAROLINA. 
We have turned over the pages of this popular exposition * 
with much interest, and gleaned some valuable information. 
" Botanists will of course find fault with it," says the author, 
who we well know could write scientifically and profoundly 
enough, if he so pleased, but who has here come down to the 
level of his most unlearned readers, discoursed separately of 
trees, shrubs, and vines, and classified these in a fashion which 
might well shock the susceptibilities of a stickler for technical 
nomenclature and natural system in botany. Now, we 
are not shocked at all ; indeed we quite enjoy a glimpse of 
Flora en deshabille and slip-shod, and are well aware how 
much easier it is, and how much better in such cases, to fit 
your book to its proper readers than to fit the readers to it. 
The fault we should find is not with the plan of this Eeport 
but with the quantity. We could wish for more of it, for a 
volume as large at least as Mr. Emerson's Report on the 
Trees and Shrubs of Massachusetts. We quite like to see 
the popular names put foremost, but would suggest that the 
botanist who does this should lead as well as follow the indigenous 
nomenclature, so far as to correct absurd or incongruous 
local names and introduce right or fitting ones as 
far as practicable. For instance, " Virgin's Bower "is not a 
proper name for Wistaria frutescens, and is rightly applied to 
1 Geological and Natural History Survey of North Carolina. Part 111. 
Botany. The Woody Plants of North Carolina. By M. A. Curtis. Raleigh, 
1860. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxx. 275.) 
Clematis Virginiana over the leaf. (We venture to add, in 
passing, C. Viorna to the list, having gathered it in Ashe 
County.) And although the people alongshore call Baccharis 
by the name of the English annual weed, " Groundsel," it 
were better to write it " Groundsel-tree." " Yellow-wood "is 
the name of Cladrastis, rather than of Symplocos, which the 
Carolinians call "Horse-Sugar." Dr. Curtis can coin a name 
upon occasion ; for surely nobody in Carolina knows Menziesia 
globularis as False Heath, nor has it any scientific 
claim to this appellation. While in critical mood we may 
express a strong dissent from the proposition that Rhododendron 
punctatum is too inferior to the other two species 
"to attract or deserve much attention." With us, it is surpassingly 
beautiful in cultivation, none the less so because 
its habit is so different, having light and pendent branches, 
when well grown forming broad and thick masses, and loaded 
with its handsome rose-colored blossoms. While Leucothoe 
Catesbmi is called " a very pretty shrub," the far handsomer 
Andromeda Jloribunda, so much prized by our nurserymen, 
gets no commendation. Magnolia Fraseri may not only 
be " cultivated in the open air near Bhiladelphia," but is 
perfectly hardy near Boston, and the earliest to blossom ; but 
we never noticed the fragrance of the flowers. On the other 
hand, as it is a native so far south as Florida, it might thrive 
in plantations anywhere in North Carolina. The flowers of 
M. cordata are described as if larger than those of 31. Fraseri, 
instead of the contrary ; we could hardly say much for 
their beauty, except in comparison to those of the common 
Cucumber-tree. Prunus Virginiana is omitted; yet surely 
it is not wanting in North Carolina. And it is almost an 
excess of conscientiousness to leave out Cladrastis, the handsomest 
tree of the country, all things considered, when it is 
known to grow only a few rods over the Tennessee line. 
On the other hand, we are disposed to doubt if the genuine 
White Spruce {Abies alba) occurs in North Carolina. 
At length we know this tree, but only in Canada and parts 
adjacent. It is more, instead of less, northern in its range 
than A. nigra. But since President Wheeler has pretty 
nearly determined the existence of A. Fraser i on the Green 
Mountains in Vermont, we could not deny that A. alba grows 
with the latter on the high mountains of North Carolina. 
We make our little criticism freely, —as we know the excellent 
author would wish, — for we think it likely that this 
part of the Eeport will pass to a second edition, — when we 
hope it will be largely augmented. 
BENTHAM'S FLORA OF HONG KONG. 
The present work 1 is the third of the series of British 
Colonial Floras, upon a new and simple plan, compact in 
form, written in English throughout, authorized and supported 
by the British Government. The Colonial department pays 
a very moderate recompense to the authors, and turns the 
work over to a publisher upon such terms as to render the 
volume generally accessible to working botanists and colonists. 
This is a much wiser as well as vastly more economical plan 
of government patronage to scientific publication than that 
adopted in this country, one which secures that the publications 
are just what is wanted and that they reach the hands which 
are to use them, and not others, — - one which, when our present 
task is done and we again cultivate the arts of peace, we 
might profitably adopt. The present work is by a masterhand 
; for Mr. Bentham is one of the most experienced, industrious, 
and judicious of systematic botanists. The island 
of Hongkong has an area of scarcely thirty square miles, its 
general aspect is bleak and barren ; yet it has already yielded 
about a thousand phEenogamous species. "At a first glance," 
as the author observes, " one is struck with the very large 
total amount of species crowded upon so small an island, 
which all navigators depict as apparently so bleak and bare ; 
1 Flora Hongkongensis ; a Description of the Flowering Plants and 
Perns of the Island of Hongkong, by George Bentham. With a Map 
of the Island. Published under the Authority of Her Majesty's Secretary 
of State for the Colonies. London, 1861. (American Journal of 
Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxii. 124.) 
with the tropical character of the great majority of species, 
when botanists agree in representing the general aspect (derived 
from the majority of individuals) to present the features 
of a much more northern latitude ; — with the large proportion 
of arborescent and shrubby species, on a rocky mass 
where the woods are limited to a few ravines, or short narrow 
valleys half monopolized by cultivation ; — and with the very 
great diversity in the species themselves, the proportion of 
orders and genera to species, and the comparative number of 
monotypic genera, being far greater in the Hongkong Flora 
than in any other Flora of similar extent known to me. The 
very large number of endemic species —of species known to 
us only from the island — is probably occasioned by cur ignorance, 
already alluded to, of the vegetation of continental 
south China." 
A fitting acknowledgment is given for the important contribution 
to this Flora furnished by the botanical collection 
(of above 500 species) made by Charles Wright, as botanist 
of the U. S. North Pacific Exploring Expedition under Captains 
Ringgold and Rodgers, duplicates of which were obligingly 
and most properly furnished by direction of the Commander 
and the enlightened Secretary of the Smithsonian 
Institution. 
In aid of the colonial botanists or amateurs who may use 
this Flora, the author has prefixed (with some minor alterations) 
the admirable brief outlines of Botany and Glossary 
prepared for his popular British Flora. 
In these Outlines the subject is regarded, not from the morphological 
or the physiological, but from the descriptive point 
of view. It opens with a statement of the nature and design 
of a Flora, and of what a botanical description ought to be. 
" These descriptions should be clear, concise, accurate, and 
characteristic, so that each one should be readily adapted to 
the plant it relates to, and to no other ; they should be as 
nearly as possible arranged under natural divisions, so as to 
facilitate the comparison of each plant with those nearest 
allied to it ; and they should be accompanied by an artificial 
key or index, by means of which the student may be guided 
step by step in the observation of such peculiarities, or characters, 
in his plant as may lead him, with the least delay, to 
the individual description belonging to it. 
" For descriptions to be clear and readily intelligible, they 
should be expressed as much as possible in ordinary wellestablished 
language. But, for the purpose of accuracy, it is 
necessary not only to give a more precise technical meaning 
to many terms used more or less vaguely in common conversation, 
but also to introduce purely technical names for such 
parts of plants or forms as are of little importance except to 
the botanist. In the present chapter it is proposed to define 
such technical or technically limited terms as are made use of 
in these Floras. 
" At the same time mathematical accuracy must not be expected. 
The forms and appearances assumed by plants and 
their parts are infinite. Names cannot be invented for all ; 
those even that have been proposed are too numerous for 
ordinary memories. Many are derived from supposed resemblances 
to well-known forms and objects. These resemblances 
are differently appreciated by different persons ; and the same 
term is not only differently applied by two different botanists, 
but it frequently happens that the same writer is led on different 
occasions to give somewhat different meanings to the same 
word. The botanist's endeavors should always be, on the one 
hand to make as near an approach to precision as circumstances 
will allow, and on the other hand to avoid that prolixity 
of detail and overloading with technical terms which tends 
rather to confusion than to clearness. In this he will be more 
or less successful. The aptness of a botanical description, 
like the beauty of a work of imagination, will always vary 
with the style and genius of the author." 
These Outlines are throughout so well sketched, and so 
worthy to be regarded as of standard authority, that we must 
still venture a criticism or two, looking to their possible improvement. 

In the first place, referring to paragraphs 8 and 88, we 
must dissent from the proposition that the subject of homology 
does not belong to " morphology in the proper sense of 
the term ; " — unless, indeed, morphology relates simply to 
form in the lowest sense, to mere shape, arbitrarily viewed, — 
which would belittle the subject down to mere terminology, 
and empty that of all scientific interest. If the comparison 
even of a perfoliate or clasping with a cordate leaf, or of 
membranaceous or coriaceous with thickened leaves, such as 
those of a Houseleek, a Mesembryanthemum, and an Aloe, 
falls within the province of morphology, surely so also must 
the comparison of an ordinary leaf with a cotyledon, with a 
bulb-scale, a bud-scale, and no less with a sepal, a petal, a 
carpel, etc. In the latter we merely trace morphological 
relations of the very same kind somewhat further and higher. 
The relation of a leaf as foliage to the scale of a bud, or to 
the thorn of a Barberry, is clearly of the same category as its 
relation to a sepal or a petal, — the latter, as we regard it, 
bringing in no new idea, and requiring no new point of view. 
Next, Quincuncial imbrication is defined by Mr. Bentham 
to be that arrangement in which " one petal is outside, an ad- 
joining one wholly inside, the three others intermediate and 
overlapping on one side." But why give this name to a mixed 
form, to that which is merely convolute aestivation deranged 
by one of the five petals getting both edges under ? And why 
change the uniform usage from De Candolle's " Theorie Elementaire," 
if not earlier, down to the present time, which defines 
the quincuncial mode as having two members exterior, 
two interior, and one with one edge overlapping its neighbor 
and the other overlapped ; an arrangement which especially 
merits a distinguishing name, since it is the normal imbrication 
in a pentamerous perianth, answering as it does to two fifths 
phyllotaxis. So that current usage and reason tell against 
the innovation. 
In the third place, we are equally inclined to demur to the 
proposed modifications of the sense of the terms perigynous 
and epigynous (paragraph 140), Mr. Bentham restricting the 
former to those cases in which the petals, etc., are adnate to 
a perfectly free calyx, as in the Cherry, and applying the 
latter in cases where the calyx, equally bearing the petals, etc., 
is adnate even merely to the base of the ovary, if only the 
adhesion reaches above the level of the insertion of the 
lowest ovule ; which would make most Saxifrages epigynous. 
Besides the etymological objections, and the inconvenience 
of a change, the new definitions seem to us to be at least as 
ambiguous as the old in practice ; and it is not surprising 
that they are not uniformly adopted in the Hongkong Flora 
itself. 
Finally, as to paragraph 166, we are not much better satisfied 
with the definition that the radicle is the " base of the future 
root," than with the original statement that it is " the future 
root." To us nothing in botany is clearer, or more patent to 
observation during germination, than that while the radicle 
is, if you please, "the base of the future root" inasmuch as it 
is that from which the root proceeds, it is itself the first internode 
of the stem. This view, to which morphological considerations 
and observation of the development long since brought 
us, appears to be generally adopted by the French and German 
botanists, but not by the English. If the radicle universally 
failed to elongate, as in Monocotyledons, and in the Pea, 
Oak and others with hypogaeous germination, this organ might 
be deemed to be merely the base of the future root ; but its 
more usual elongation, in the manner of any other internode, 
plainly reveals the cauline nature which analogy would also 
assign to it. 
The chapter on Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology is new r , 
is very condensed, and considering that it deals with matters 
to which Mr. Bentham has never specially attended, is remarkably 
good and accurate. We merely observe in passing, of 
paragraphs 195, 197, that the distinction between exogenous 
and endogenous stems is as obvious during the first season, 
and even at its beginning, as ever afterward, and it is then 
that the purely systematic botanist will more commonly have 
occasion to examine the structure in this regard; of § 198 5 , that 
"the liber or inner bark " is by no means always " formed of 
bast cells ; " of § 200, that we cannot accept the statement 
that "in the leaf the' structure of the petioles and principal 
ribs or veins is the same as that of the young branches of 
which they are ramifications," at least in any sense in which 
the sentence would be understood by the learner. Paragraph 
207, that roots grow in length at the extremities, "in proportion 
as they find the requisite nutriment," might imply the 
popular fallacy that they grow directly by means of what they 
take in from the soil, which surely they do not, unless they 
live in the manner of Fungi. To say that the starch, etc. in 
a tuber or in a seed " appears to be a store of nourishment " 
for the early growth of the buds or the embryo, is a remarkably 
over-cautious statement (how could these grow without 
some store of elaborated matter to feed upon ?) ; nor does the 
consideration that similar accumulations in the pericarps of 
many fruits "perish long before germination," and so do not 
nourish the embryo, afford to us any presumption to the contrary, 
even if we could not conceive - — as we readily can —of 
other final causes, some of them important to the continuance 
of the species thereby subserved. 
The fourth chapter, on the Collection, Preservation, and 
Determination of Plants, and upon Aberrations from the 
ordinary type or appearance, is most excellent. 
DR. HOOKER'S DISTRIBUTION OF ARCTIC PLANTS. 
The immediate subjects of the treatise 1 are the Arctic 
plants, of every phsenogamous species known to occur spontaneously 
anywhere within the Arctic circle ; the geographical 
distribution of which, so far as known, is carefully indicated : 
1. Within the Arctic region, under the several divisions — 
Europe, Asia, western America (Behring's Straits to the 
Mackenzie River), eastern America (Mackenzie River to Baffin's 
Bay), and arctic Greenland. 2. Without this circle, and 
under the general divisions of north and central European and 
north Asiatic Distribution, with three longitudinal subdivisions 
; American Distribution, with appropriate subdivisions ; 
1 Outlines of the Distribution of Arctic Plants. By Joseph D. Hooter. 
Extr. Transactions Linncean Society, of London. Vol. xxiii. pp. 251-348. 
1861. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxiv. 144.) 
south European and African Distribution ; central and south 
Asiatic Distribution. The theory upon which the facts are 
collocated and discussed, and which they are thought strongly 
to confirm, is that of Edward Forbes, which was completed, 
if not indeed originated, by Darwin : — " first, that the existing 
Scandinavian flora is of great antiquity, and that previous 
to the glacial epoch it was more uniformly distributed 
over the Polar Zone than it is now ; secondly, that during 
the advent of the glacial period this Scandinavian vegetation 
was driven southward in every longitude, and even across the 
tropics into the south temperate zone ; and that, on the succeeding 
warmth of the present epoch, those species that survived 
both ascended the mountains of the warmer zones, and 
also returned northward, accompanied by aborigines of the 
countries they had invaded during their southern migration. 
Mr. Darwin shows how aptly such an explanation meets the 
difficulty of accounting for the restriction of so many American 
and Asiatic arctic types to their own peculiar longitudinal 
zones, and for what is a far greater difficulty, the 
representation of the same arctic genera by closely allied 
species in different longitudes. . . . Mr. Darwin's hypothesis 
accounts for many varieties of one plant being found in various 
alpine and arctic regions of the globe, by the competition 
into which their common ancestor was brought with the 
aborigines of the countries it invaded. Different races survived 
the struggle for life in different longitudes ; and these 
races again, afterwards converging on the zone from which 
their ancestor started, present there a plexus of closely allied 
but more or less distinct varieties, or even species, whose 
geographical limits overlap, and whose members, very probably, 
occasionally breed together." A further advantage 
claimed for this hypothesis is, that it explains a fact brought 
out by Dr. Hooker in a former publication, namely : " that 
the Scandinavian flora is present in every latitude of the 
globe, and is the only one that is so." 
Moreover, Dr. Hooker discovers in the flora of Greenland a 
state of things explicable upon this hypothesis, but hardly by 
any other, namely : its almost complete identity with that of 
Lapland ; its general paucity, as well as its poverty in peculiar 
species ; the rarity of American species there ; the fewness 
of temperate plants in temperate Greenland ; and the 
presence of a few of the rarest Greenland and Scandinavian 
species in enormously remote alpine localities of west America 
and the United States. Our author reasons thus : "Ifit be 
granted that the polar area was once occupied by the Scandinavian 
flora, and that the cold of the glacial epoch did drive 
this vegetation southwards, it is evident that the Greenland 
individuals, from being confined to a peninsula, would have 
been exposed to very different conditions from those of the 
great continents. In Greenland many species would, as it 
were, be driven into the sea, that is, exterminated ; and the 
survivors would be confined to the southern portion of the 
peninsula, and, not being there brought into competition with 
other types, there could be no struggle for life amongst their 
progeny, and, consequently, no selection of better adapted 
varieties. On the return of heat, survivors would simply 
travel northwards, unaccompanied by the plants of any other 
country." 
The rustic denizens of Greenland, huddled upon the point 
of the peninsula during the long glacial cold, have never enjoyed 
the advantages of foreign travel ; those of the adjacent 
continents on either side have "seen the world," and gained 
much improvement and diversity thereby. Considering the 
present frigid climate of Greenland, the isotherm of 32° just 
impinging upon its southern point, its moderate summer and 
low autumnal temperature, we should rather have supposed 
the complete extermination of the Greenland ante-glacial 
flora; and have referred the Scandinavian character of the 
existing flora (all but eleven of the 207 arctic species, and 
almost all those of temperate Greenland, being European 
plants) directly to subsequent immigration from the eastern 
continent. Several geographical considerations, and the course 
of the currents, which Dr. Hooker brings to view on p. 270, 
would go far towards explaining why Greenland should have 
been re-peopled from the Old. rather than from the New 
World ; while the list (on pp. 272, 273) of upwards of 230 
Arctic-European species, which are all likewise American 
plants, but are remarkable for their absence from Greenland, 
would indicate no small difficulty in the westward migration, 
and render it most probable that the diffusion of species from 
the Old World to the New was eastward through Asia, for 
the arctic no less than (as has elsewhere been shown) for the 
temperate plants. Was it that Greenland and the adjacent 
part of the American continent remained glacial longer than 
the rest of the zone ? And if our northern regions were thus 
colonized by an ancient Scandinavian flora, this seems to 
have been in return for a still earlier donation of American 
plants to Europe, to which a very few existing but numerous 
fossil remains bear testimony. Speculative inquiries of this 
sort are enticing, and the time is approaching in which they 
may be fruitful. 
Indeed, the characteristic features and the immediate interest 
and importance of the present memoir, as of others 
of the same general scope and interest, are found in this : 
1. That the actual geographical distribution of species is 
something to be accounted for ; 2. That our existing species, 
or their originals, are far more ancient than was formerly 
thought, mainly if not wholly antedating the glacial period ; 
and, 3. That they have therefore been subject to grave climatic 
vicissitudes and changes. There may be many naturalists 
who still hesitate to accept these propositions, as there are 
°ne or two who deny them ; but these or similar conclusions 
have evidently been reached by those botanists, paleontologists, 
and geologists in general who have most turned their 
thoughts to such inquiries, and who march foremost in the 
advancing movement of these sciences. In this position, the 
author of the present memoir, — prepossessed with Darwin's 
theory of the diversification of species through natural selection, 
— having occasion to revise systematically the materials 
°f the arctic flora, is naturally led to compare the new theory 
with the facts of the case in this regard ; to see how far the 
vicissitudes to which it is all but demonstrated that the plants 
°f the northern hemisphere have long been subjected, and 
the modifications and extinctions which he thinks must have 
ensued under such grave changes and perils, during such lapse 
of time, may serve to explain the actual distribution of arctic 
species and the remarkable dispersion of many of them. That 
the enquiry is a legitimate and a hopeful one we must all agree, 
whether we favor Darwinian hypotheses or not. How well it 
works in the present trial we could not venture to pronounce 
without a far more critical examination than could now be 
undertaken. But there are good reasons for the opinion that 
this is just the ground upon which the elements of the new 
hypothesis figure to the best advantage. 
The mass of facts, so patiently and skillfully coUected and 
digested in this essay, have a high and positive value, irrespective 
of all theoretical views, We cannot undertake to 
offer an abstract, but may note here and there a point of interest. 
The flowering plants which have been collected 
within the arctic circle number 762, namely, 214 Monocotyledons 
and 548 Dicotyledons. They occupy a circumpolar 
belt of 10° to 14° of latitude. The only abrupt change in 
the vegetation anywhere along this belt is at Baffin's Bay, 
the opposite shores of which present, as has been already intimated, 
an almost purely European flora on the east coast, 
but a large admixture of purely American species on the 
west. 
" Regarded as a whole, the arctic flora is decidedly Scandinavian 
; for Arctic Scandinavia, or Lapland, though a very 
small tract of land, contains by far the richest arctic flora, 
amounting to three fourths of the whole." This would not 
be very surprising, since this is much the least frigid portion 
of the zone, and has the highest summer temperature ; 
but "upwards of three-fifths of the species, and almost all 
the genera of Arctic Asia and America, are likewise Lapponian; 
" so that the Scandinavian character pervades the 
whole. 
In the section on the local distribution of plants within the 
arctic circle, Dr. Hooker shows that there is no close relation 
discoverable between the isothermal lines (whether annual or 
monthly) and the amount of vegetation, beyond the general fact 
that the scantiness of the Siberian flora is associated with a 
great southern bend in Asia, and its richness in Lapland, with 
an equally great northern bend there, of the annual isotherm 
of 32°. Yet " the same isotherm bends northwards in passing 
from eastern America to Greenland, the vegetation of which 
is the scantier of the two ; and it passed to the northward of 
Iceland, which is much poorer in species than those parts of 
Lapland to the southward of which it passes." A glance at 
the supposed former state of things would suggest the explanation 
of all that is anomalous here. 
" The June isothermals, as indicating the most effective 
temperatures in the arctic regions (when all vegetation is 
torpid for nine months, and excessively stimulated during the 
three others), might have been expected to indicate better the 
positions of the most luxuriant vegetation. But neither is 
this the case; for the June isothermal of 41°, which lies 
within the arctic zone in Asia, where the vegetation is scanty 
in the extreme, descends to lat. 54° in the meridian of Behring's 
Straits, where the flora is comparatively luxuriant." The 
aridity of the former and the humidity of the latter district 
here offers an obvious explanation ; also the great severity of 
the winter in the former, and its mildness in the latter. And 
weat Britain, in which a far greater diversity of species are 
capable of surviving without protection than in the eastern 
C mted States under the same annual isotherms, indicates the 
advantage of a mean over an extreme climate in this respect, 
it only there be a certain amount of summer heat. For lack 
of that, doubtless, very many of the introduced denizens of 
-Britain would soon disappear, if deprived of human care. 
" The northern limit to which vegetation extends varies in 
every longitude ; the extreme is still unknown ; it may, indeed, 
reach to the pole itself. Phaanogamic plants, however, 
ar e probably nowhere found far north of lat. 81°. Seventy 
nowering plants are found in Spitzbergen ; and Sabine and 
Ross collected nine on Walden Island, towards its northern 
extreme, but none on Boss's Islet, fifteen miles further to the 
north. 
" Saxifraga oppositifolia is probably the most übiquitous, 
and may be considered the commonest and most arctic flower- 
ing plant." There are only eight or nine phaenogamous 
species peculiar to the arctic zone, and only one peculiar 
genus, namely, the grass Pleuropogon. 1 Of the 762 found 
south of the circle, all but 150 have advanced beyond lat. 40° 
N. in some part of the world ; about 50 of them are identified 
as natives of the mountainous regions of the tropics, and 105 
as inhabiting the south temperate zone. 
" The proportion of species which have migrated southward 
in the Old and New World also bear a fair relation to the 
facilities for migration presented by the different continents." 
The tables given to illustrate this " present in a very striking 
point of view the fact of the Scandinavian flora being the 
most widely distributed over the world. The Mediterranean, 
south African, Malayan, Australian, and all the floras of the 
New World, have narrow ranges compared with the Scandinavian, 
and none of them form a prominent feature in any 
other continent than their own. But the Scandinavian not 
only girdles the globe in the arctic circle, and dominates overall 
others in the north temperate zone of the Old World, 
but intrudes conspicuously into every other temperate flora, 
whether in the northern or southern hemisphere, or on the 
Alps of tropical countries. ... In one respect this migration 
is most direct in the American meridian, where more arctic 
species reach the highest southern latitudes. This I have 
accounted for (' Flora Antarctica,' p. 230) by the continuous 
chain of the Andes having favored their southern dispersion." 
In presenting the actual number of arctic species, and in 
delineating their geographical ranges, the question, what are 
to be regarded as species, becomes all-important. As to this, 
it does not so much matter what scale is adopted, as to know 
clearly what the adopted scale is. Here we are not left in 
1 Douglasia is mentioned in another place (p. 269) as an absolutely peculiar 
arctic or arctic-alpine genus of eastern America. But we have considered 
this genus as identical with Gregoria, of Duby. It would appear 
as if these two genera were established in the same year, since Lindley 
himself, in the "Botanical Register," refers to Brando's Journal for January, 
1828, for his original article. But this article will be found in the 
volume of that Journal for 1827 ; so that the name Douglasia is to be 
adopted, if the genus is sufficiently distinct from Androsace. 
doubt. Taking European botanists by number, we are confident 
that nine out of ten would have enlarged the list of 762 
phaenogamous arctic species to 800 or more, and would not 
have recognized a goodly number of the synonyms adduced, 
thereby considerably affecting the assigned ranges, especially 
into temperate and austral latitudes. In this regard we 
should side with Dr. Hooker on the whole, but with differences 
and with questionings — with halting steps following his 
bold and free movement, but probably arriving at the same 
goal at length. Indeed, we freely receive the view which Dr. 
Hooker presents as appropriate to his particular purpose, and 
as the most useful expression of our knowledge of the relationships 
of the plants in question, when collocated in reference 
to the ideas upon which this memoir is based. That is : 
" if, with many botanists, we consider these closely allied varieties 
and species as derived by variation and natural selection 
from one parent form at a comparatively modern epoch, 
we may with advantage, for certain purposes, regard the 
aggregate distribution of such very closely allied species as 
that of one plant." "An empirical grouping of allied plants, 
for the purposes of distribution, may thus lead to a practical 
solution of difficulties in the classification and synonymy of 
species. My thus grouping names must not be regarded as 
a committal of myself to the opinion that the plants thus 
grouped are not to be held as distinct species. . . . My main 
object is to show the affinities of the polar plants, and I can 
best do this by keeping the specific idea comprehensive." And 
turther : " I wish it then to be clearly understood, that the 
catalogue here appended is intended to include every species 
hitherto found within the arctic circle, together with those 
most closely allied forms which I believe to have branched off 
from one common parent within a comparatively recent geological 
epoch, and that immediately previous to the glacial 
period or since then" (p. 279). All we could ask more 
would be some distinction (typographical or other), to mark, 
1, undoubted and complete synonyms ; 2, mere variations or 
states, local or otherwise, or undoubted varieties ; 3, such as 
theory apart, would claim to be regarded as distinct but 
closely related species. For example : to take one order, 
while Rhinanthus minor may well be considered as " not a 
sufficiently constant form to rank as a race even," while Limosella 
tenuifolia could rank for no more than a race, and while 
Castilleia septentrionalis and C. pallida, we are now convinced, 
however distinct in this single character, differ only 
(and inconstantly) in the relative development of the galea, 
we think it likely that Pedicularis lanata, Willd., does not 
rightfully merge in P. hirsuta this side of the glacial period, 
although it perhaps may into P. Langsdorffii, and that into 
P. Sudetica. But this is no place for criticisms upon the 
limitation of species, upon which the opinions of botanists will 
so greatly depend upon the amount of their materials, and 
upon which the best considered opinions must be subject to 
frequent revisal. Nor does the value of the present memoir 
at all depend upon the settlement of such points. To the 
philosophical naturalist, as to the archaeologist, just now the 
most interesting and pregnant epoch of the world's natural 
history is that immediately antecedent to the present, that 
near past from which the present has proceeded, and upon 
which so much light, from very diverse sources, is now being 
concentrated: towards its elucidation the memoir we have 
been considering is a very valuable contribution. 
ALPHONSE DE CANDOLLE ON THE VARIATION 
AND DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 
This is the title of a paper 1 by Monsieur De Candolle growing 
out of his study of the Oaks. It was published in the 
November number of the " Bibliotheque Universelle," and 
separately issued as a pamphlet. A less inspiring task could 
hardly be assigned to a botanist than the systematic elaboration 
of the genus Quercus and its allies. The vast materials 
assembled under De Candolle's hands, while disheartening 
1 Etude sur V E spice, a V occasion d'une Revision de la Famille des Cupulifers. 
Par M. Alphonse De Candolle. (American Journal of Science 
and Arts, 2 ser., xxxv. 431.) 
for their bulk, offered small hope of novelty. The subject 
was both extremely trite and extremely difficult. Happily it 
occurred to De Candolle that an interest might be imparted 
to an onerous undertaking, and a work of necessity be turned 
to good account for science, by studying the Oaks in view of 
the question of Species. 
What this term Species means, or should mean, in natural 
history, what the limits of species, inter se or chronologically, 
or in geographical distribution, their modifications, actual or 
probable, their origin, and their destiny, — these are questions 
which surge up from time to time ; and now and then in 
the progress of science they come to assume a new and hopeful 
interest. Botany and Zoology, Geology, and what our 
author, feeling the want of a new term, proposes to name 
Epiontology, 1 all lead up to and converge into this class of 
questions, while recent theories shape and point the discussion. 
So we look with eager interest to see what light the 
study of Oaks, by a very careful, experienced, and conservative 
botanist, particularly conversant with the geographical 
relation of plants, may throw upon the subject. 
The course of investigation in this instance does not differ 
from that ordinarily pursued by working botanists ; nor, indeed, 
are the theoretical conclusions other than those to which 
a similar study of other orders might not have equally led. 
-the Oaks afford a very good occasion for the discussion of 
questions which press upon our attention, and perhaps they 
otter peculiarly good materials on account of the number of 
fossil species. 
Preconceived notions about species being laid aside, the 
1 A name which, at the close of his article, De Candolle proposes for 
the study of the succession of organized beings, to comprehend, therefore, 
palaeontology and everything included under what is called geographical 
botany and geographical zoology, — the whole forming a science parallel 
t° geology, — the latter devoted to the history of unorganized bodies, the 
tormer, to that of organized beings, as respects origin, distribution, and 
succession. We are not satisfied with the word, notwithstanding the precedent 
of palaeontology ; since ontology, the science of being, has an established 
meaning as referring to mental existence, — i. e., is a synonym or 
a department of metaphysics. 
specimens in hand were distributed, according to their obvious 
resemblances, into groups of apparently identical or 
nearly identical forms, which were severally examined and 
compared. Where specimens were few, as from countries 
little explored, the work was easy, but the conclusions, as will 
be seen, of small value. The fewer the materials, the smaller 
the likelihood of forms intermediate between any two, and — 
what does not appear being treated upon the old law-maxim 
as non-existent — species are readily enough defined. Where, 
however, specimens abound, as in the case of the Oaks of Europe, 
of the Orient, and of the United States, of which the 
specimens amounted to hundreds, collected at different ages, 
in varied localities, by botanists of all sorts of views and predilections, 
— here alone were data fit to draw useful conclusions 
from. Here, as De Candolle remarks, he had every 
advantage, being furnished with materials more complete than 
any one person could have procured from his own herborizations, 
more varied than if he had observed a hundred times 
over the same forms in the same district, and more impartial 
than if they had all been amassed by one person with his own 
ideas or predispositions. So that vast herbaria, into which 
contributions from every source have flowed for years, furnish 
the best possible data — at least are far better than any practicable 
amount of personal herborization — for the comparative 
study of related forms occurring over wide tracts of territory. 
But as the materials increase, so do the difficulties. 
Forms, which appeared totally distinct, approach or blend 
through intermediate gradations ; characters, stable in a limited 
number of instances or in a limited district, prove unstable 
occasionally, or when observed over a wider area ; and the 
practical question is forced upon the investigator, — what here 
is probably fixed and specific, and what is variant, pertaining 
to individual, variety, or race ? 
In the examination of these rich materials, certain char- 
acters were found to vary upon the same branch, or upon the 
same tree, sometimes according to age or development, sometimes 
irrespective of such relations or of any assignable reasons. 
Such characters, of course, are not specific, although 
many of them are such as would have been expected to be 
constant in the same species, and are such as generally enter 
into specific definitions. Variations of this sort, De Candolle, 
with his usual painstaking, classifies and tabulates, and even 
expresses numerically their frequency in certain species. The 
results are brought well to view in a systematic enumeration 
: — 
(1) Of characters which frequently vary upon the same 
branch : over a dozen such are mentioned. 
(2) Of those which sometimes vary upon the same branch : 
a smaller number of these are mentioned. 
(3) Those so rare that they might be called monstrosities. 

Then he enumerates characters, ten in number, wdiich he 
has never found to vary on the same branch, and which 
therefore may better claim to be employed as specific. But, 
as among them he includes the duration of the leaves, the 
size of the cupule, and the form and size of its scales, which 
are by no means wholly uniform in different trees of the 
same species, even these characters must be taken with allowance. 
In fact, having first brought together, as groups 
of the lowest order, those forms which varied upon the same 
stock, he next had to combine similarly various forms which, 
though not found associated upon the same branch, were 
thoroughly blended by intermediate degrees. 
the lower groups (varieties or races) being thus constituted, I 
nave given the rank of species to the groups next above these, which 
cutter in other respects, i. e., either in characters which were not 
found united upon certain individuals, or in those which do not show 
transitions from one individual to another. For the Oaks of regions 
sufficiently known, the species thus formed rest upon satisfactory 
bases, of which the proof can be furnished. It is quite otherwise 
with those which are represented in our herbaria by single or few 
specimens. These are provisional species, — species which may 
hereafter fall to the rank of simple varieties. I have not been inclined 
to prejudge such questions ; indeed, in this regard, lam not 
disposed to follow those authors whose tendency is, as they say, to 
reunite species. I never reunite them without proof in each partic- 
ular case ; while the botanists to whom I refer do so on the ground 
of analogous variations or transitions occurring in the same genus 
or in the same family. For example, resting on the fact that Quereus 
Ilex, Q. coccifera, Q. acutifolia, etc., have the leaves sometimes 
entire and sometimes toothed upon the same branch, or present 
transitions from one tree to another, I might readily have united 
my Q. Tlapuxahuensis to Q. Sartorii of Liebmann, since these 
two differ only in their entire or their toothed leaves. From the 
fact that the length of the peduncle varies in Q. Hobur and many 
other Oaks, I might have combined Q. Seemannii, Liebm., with 
Q. salicifolia, Nee. I have not admitted these inductions, but have 
demanded visible proof in each particular case. Many species are 
thus left as provisional ; but in proceeding thus, the progress of the 
science will be more regular, and the synonymy less dependent upon 
the caprice or the theoretical opinions of each author." 
This is safe and to a certain degree judicious, no doubt, 
as respects published species. Once admitted, they may stand 
until they are put down by evidence, direct or circumstantial. 
Surely a species may rightfully be condemned on good circumstantial 
evidence. But what course does De Candolle 
pursue in the case — of every-day occurrences to most workino 
botanists having to elaborate collections from countries 
not so well explored as Europe — when the forms in question, 
or one of the two, are as yet unnamed ? Does he introduce 
as a new species every form which he cannot connect by 
ocular proof with a near relative, from which it differs only 
in particulars which he sees are inconstant in better known 
species of the same group ? We suppose not. But if so, 
little improvement for the future upon the state of things 
revealed in the following paragraph can be expected. 
"In the actual state of our knowledge, after having seen nearly 
all the original specimens, and in some species as many as 200 representatives 
from different localities, I estimate that, out of the 300 
species of Cupuliferee which will be enumerated in the ' Prodromus,' 
two thirds at least are provisional species. In general, when we 
consider what a multitude of species were described from a single 
specimen, or from the forms of a. single locality, of a single country, 
or are badly described, it is difficult to believe that above one third 
of the actual species in botanical works will remain unchanged." 
VARIA TION AND DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 135 
Such being the results of the want of adequate knowledge, 
how is it likely to be when our knowledge is largely increased? 
The judgment of so practised a botanist asDe Candolle 
is important in this regard, and it accords with that of 
other botanists of equal experience. 
" They are mistaken," he pointedly asserts, " who repeat 
that the greater part of our species are clearly limited, and 
that the doubtful species are in a feeble minority. This 
seemed to be true, so long as a genus was imperfectly known, 
and its species were founded upon few specimens, that is to 
say, were provisional. Just as we come to know them better, 
intermediate forms flow in, and doubts as to specific limits 
augment." 
De Candolle insists, indeed, in this connection, that the 
higher the rank of the groups, the more definite their limitation, 
or, in other terms, the fewer the ambiguous or doubtful 
forms; that genera are more strictly limited than species, 
tribes than genera, orders than tribes, etc. We are not convinced 
of this. Often where it has appeared to be so, advancing 
discovery has brought intermediate forms to light, perplexing 
to the systematist. " They are mistaken," we think 
more than one systematic botanist will say, "who repeat 
that the greater part of our natural orders and tribes are 
absolutely limited," however we may agree that we will limit 
hem. Provisional genera we suppose are proportionally 
hardly less common than provisional species ; and hundreds of 
genera are kept up on considerations of general propriety or 
general convenience, although well known to shade off into 
adjacent ones by complete gradations. Somewhat of this 
greater fixity of higher groups, therefore, is rather apparent 
than real. On the other hand, that varieties should be less 
definite than species, follows from the very terms employed. 
- 1 - hey are ranked as varieties, rather than species, just because 
°t their less definiteness. 
Singular as it may appear, we have heard it denied that 
spontaneous varieties occur. De Candolle makes the important 
announcement that, in the Oak genus, the best known 
s Pecies are just those which present the greatest number of 
spontaneous varieties and sub-varieties. The maximum is 
found in Q. Robur, with twenty-eight varieties, all spontaneous. 
Of Q. Busitanica eleven varieties are enumerated, 
of Q. Calliprinos ten, of Q. coccifera eight, etc. And he 
significantly adds that " these very species which offer such 
numerous modifications aire themselves ordinarily surrounded 
by other forms, provisionally called species, because of the 
absence of known transitions or variations, but to which some 
of these will probably have to be joined hereafter." The inference 
is natural, if not inevitable, that the difference between 
such species and such varieties is only one of degree, 
either as to amount of divergence, or of hereditary fixity, or as 
to the frequency or rarity, at the present time, of intermediate 
forms. 
This brings us to the second section of De Candolle's article, 
in which he passes on, from the observation of the present 
forms and affinities of Cupuliferous plants, to the consideration 
of their probable history and origin. Suffice it to say, 
that he frankly accepts the inferences derived from the whole 
course of observation, and even contemplates with satisfaction 
a probable historical connection between congeneric species. 
He accepts and, by various considerations drawn from 
the geographical distribution of European Cupuliferm, fortifies 
the conclusion — long ago arrived at by Edward Forbes 
— that the present species, and even some of their varieties, 
date back to about the close of the Tertiary epoch, since 
which time they have been subject to frequent and great 
changes of habitation or limitation, but without appreciable 
change of specific form or character ; that is, without profounder 
changes than those within which a species at the 
present time is known to vary. Moreover, he is careful to 
state that he is far from concluding that the time of the 
appearance of a species in Europe at all indicates the time 
of its origin. Looking back still further into the Tertiary 
epoch, of which the vegetable remains indicate many analogous, 
but few, if any, identical forms, he concludes, with Heer 
and others, that specific changes of form, as well as changes 
of station, are to be presumed. And finally, that " the theory 
136 REVIEWS. 
VARIATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 137 
of a succession of forms through the deviation of anterior 
forms is the most natural hypothesis, and the most accordant 
with the known facts in palaeontology, geographical botany 
and zoology, of anatomical structure and classification : but 
direct proof of it is wanting, and moreover, if true, it must 
have taken place very slowly; so slowly indeed, that its 
effects are discernible only after a lapse of time far longer 
than our historic epoch." 
In contemplating the present state of the species of Cupu- 
Uferce in Europe, De Candolle comes to the conclusion that, 
while the Beech is increasing, and extending its limits southward 
and westward (at the expense of Coniferm and Birches), 
the Common Oak, to some extent, and the Turkey Oak decidedly, 
are diminishing and retreating, and this wholly irrespective 
of man's agency. This is inferred of the Turkey 
Oak from the great gaps found in its present geographical 
area, which are otherwise inexplicable, and which he regards 
as plain indications of a partial extinction. Community of 
descent of all the individuals of species is of course implied 
in these and all similar reasonings. 
An obvious result of such partial extinction is clearly 
enough brought to view. The European Oaks (like the 
American species) greatly tend to vary, — that is, they manifest 
an active disposition to produce new forms. Every form 
tends to become hereditary, and so to pass from the state of 
mere variation to that of race ; and of these competing incipient 
races some only will survive. Quercus Robur offers 
a familiar illustration of the manner in which one form may 
in the course of time become separated into two or more 
distinct ones. 
To Linnaeus this Common Oak of Europe was all of one 
species. But of late years the greater number of European 
botanists have regarded it as including three species, Q.pedunculate!, 
Q. sessilifora, and Q. pubescens. De Candolle looks 
with satisfaction to the independent conclusion which he 
reached from a long and patient study of the forms (and 
which Webb, Gay, Bentham and others had equally reached), 
that the view of Linnaeus was correct, inasmuch as it goes to 
show that the idea and the practical application of the term 
species have remained unchanged during the century which 
has elapsed since the publication of the "Species Blantarum." 
But the idea remaining unchanged, the facts might appear 
under a different aspect, and the conclusion be different, under 
a slight and very supposable change of circumstances. Of 
the twenty-eight spontaneous varieties of Q. Robur, which 
De Candolle recognizes, all but six, he remarks, fall naturally 
under the three sub-species, pedunculata, sessiliflora, and 
pubescens, and are therefore forms grouped around these as 
centres ; and, moreover, the few connecting forms are by 
no means the most common. Were these to die out, it is 
clear that the three forms which have already been so frequently 
taken for species, would be what the group of four 
or five provisionally admitted species which closely surround 
Q. Robur (see p. 435) now are. The best example of such 
a case, as having in all probability occurred, through geographical 
segregation and partial extinction, is that of the 
Cedar, thus separated into the Deodar, the Lebanon, and the 
Atlantic Cedars, — a case admirably worked out by Dr. 
Hooker two or three years ago. 1 
A special advantage of the Cupuliferm for determining 
the probable antiquity of existing species in Europe, De Candolle 
finds in the size and character of their fruits. However 
it may be with other plants (and he comes to the conclusion 
generally that marine currents and all other means of distant 
transport have played only a very small part in the actual 
dispersion of species), the transport of acorns and chestnuts 
by natural causes across an arm of the sea in a condition to 
germinate, and much more the spontaneous establishment of 
a forest of Oaks or Chestnuts in this way, De Candolle conceives 
to be fairly impossible in itself, and contrary to all 
experience. From such considerations, i. c, from the actual 
dispersion of the existing species, with occasional aid from 
Fost-tertiary deposits, it is thought to be shown that the principal 
Cupuliferm of the Old World attained their actual extension 
before the present separation of Sicily, Sardinia and 
Corsica, or of Britain, from the European continent. 
1 Natural History Review, Jan., 1862. 
This view once adopted, and this course once entered upon, 
has to be pursued farther. Quercus Robur of Europe with 
its bevy of admitted derivatives, and its attending species 
only provisionally admitted to that rank, is very closely 
related to certain species of eastern Asia, and of Oregon and 
California, ■ — so closely that " a view of the specimens by no 
means forbids the idea that they have all originated from 
Q. Robur, or have originated, with the latter, from one or 
more preceding forms so like the present ones that a naturalist 
could hardly know whether to call them species or varieties." 
Moreover, there are fossil leaves from diluvian deposits in 
Italy, figured by Gaudin, which are hardly distinguishable 
from those of Q. Robur on the one hand, and from those of 
Q. Douglasii, etc., of California on the other. No such 
leaves are found in any Tertiary deposit in Europe ; but such 
are found of that age, it appears, in northwest America, 
where their remote descendants still flourish. So that the 
probable genealogy of Q. Robur, traceable in Europe up to 
the commencement of the present epoch, looks eastward and 
far into the past on far distant shores. 
Q. Rex, the Evergreen Oak of southern Europe and northern 
Africa, reveals a similar archaeology ; but its presence in 
Algeria leads De Candolle to regard it as a much more 
ancient denizen of Europe than Q. Robur ; and a Tertiary 
Oak, Q. ilicoides, from a very old Miocene bed in Switzerland, 
is thought to be one of its ancestral forms. This high 
antiquity once established, it follows almost of course that the 
very nearly related species in central Asia, in Japan, in California, 
and even our own Live Oak with its Mexican relatives, 
may probably enough be regarded as early offshoots 
from the same stock with Q. Rex. 
In brief, — not to continue these abstracts and remarks, 
and without reference to Darwin's particular theory (which 
De Candolle at the close very fairly considers), — if existing 
species, or many of them, are as ancient as they are now 
generally thought to be, and were subject to the physical and 
geographical changes (among them the coming and the going 
°f the Glacial epoch) which this antiquity implies ; if in 
former times they were as liable to variation as they now are ; 
and if the individuals of the same species may claim a common 
local origin, — then we cannot wonder that " the theory of 
a succession of forms by deviations of anterior forms " should 
be regarded as " the most natural hypothesis," nor at the 
general advance made towards its acceptance in some form or 
other. 
The question being, not, how plants and animals originated, 
but, how came the existing animals and plants to be just 
where they are and what they are ; it is plain that naturalists 
interested in such inquiries are mostly looking for the answer 
in one direction. The general drift of opinion, or at least of 
expectation, is exemplified by this essay of De Candolle ; and 
the set and force of the current are seen by noticing how it 
carries along naturalists of widely different views and prepossessions 
— some faster and farther than others, — but all in 
one way. The tendency is, we may say, to extend the law of 
continuity, or something analogous to it, from inorganic to 
organic nature, and in the latter to connect the present with 
the past in some sort of material connection. The generalization 
may indeed be expressed so as not to assert that the 
connection is genetic, as in Mr. Wallace's formula : " Every 
species has come into existence coincident both in time and 
space with preexisting closely allied species." Edward Forbes, 
who may be called the originator of this whole line of inquiry, 
long ago expressed a similar view. But the only material 
sequence we know, or can clearly conceive, in plants and 
animals, is that from parent to progeny ; and, as Dc Candolle 
implies, the origin of species and that of races can hardly be 
much unlike, nor governed by other than the same laws, 
whatever these may be. 
The progress of opinion upon this subject in one generation 
is not badly represented by that of De Candolle himself, who 
is by no means prone to adopt new views without much consideration. 
In an elementary treatise published in the year 
1835, he adopted, and, if we rightly remember, vigorously 
maintained, Schouw's idea of the double or multiple origin of 
species, at least of some species, — a view which has been 
carried out to its ultimate development only perhaps by 
Agassiz, in the denial of any necessary genetic connection 
among the individuals of the same species, or of any original 
localization more restricted than the area now occupied by 
the species. But in 1855, in his " Geographie Botanique," 
the multiple hypothesis, although in principle not abandoned, 
is seen to lose its point, in view of the probable high antiquity 
of existing species. The actual vegetation of the world being 
now regarded as a continuation, through numerous geological, 
geographical, and more recently historical, changes, of anterior 
vegetations, the actual distribution of plants is seen to be 
a consequence of preceding conditions and geological considerations, 
and these alone may be expected to explain all the 
facts, many of them so curious and extraordinary, of the 
actual geographical distribution of the species. In the present 
essay, not only the distribution but the origin of congeneric 
species is regarded as something derivative ; whether derived 
by slow and very gradual changes in the course of ages, 
according to Darwin, or by a sudden, inexplicable change of 
their Tertiary ancestors, as conceived by Heer, De Candolle 
hazards no opinion. It may, however, be inferred that he 
looks upon " natural selection " (which he rather underrates) 
as a real, but insufficient, cause ; while some curious remarks 
(pp. 57, 58), upon the number of monstrosities annually produced, 
and the possibility of their enduring, may be regarded 
as favorable to Heer's view. 
As an index to the progress of opinion in the direction referred 
to, it will be interesting to compare Sir Charles Lyell's 
well-known chapters of twenty or thirty years ago, in which 
the permanence of species was ably maintained, with his treatment 
of the same subject in a work just issued in England, 
which, however, has not yet reached us. 
A belief in the derivation of species may be maintained 
along with a conviction of great persistence of specific characters. 
This is the idea of the excellent Swiss vegetable palaeontologist 
Heer, who imagines a sudden change of specific 
type at certain periods, and perhaps is that of Pictet. Falconer 
adheres to somewhat similar views in his elaborate 
paper on Elephants, living and fossil, in the " Natural History 
Eeview " for January last. Noting that " there is clear evidence 
of the true Mammoth having existed in America long 
after the period of the northern drift, when the surface of the 
country had settled down into its present form," and also in 
Europe so late as to have been a contemporary of the Irish 
Elk, and on the other hand that it existed in England so far 
back as before the deposition of the boulder Clay ; also that 
four well-defined species of fossil Elephant are known to have 
existed in Europe ; that " a vast number of the remains of 
three of these species have been exhumed over a large area in 
Europe ; and, even in the geological sense, an enormous interval 
of time has elapsed between the formation of the most 
ancient and the most recent of these deposits, quite sufficient 
to test the persistence of specific characters in an Elephant," 
he presents the question : "Do then the successive Elephants 
occurring in these strata show any signs of a passage from 
the older form into the newer ? " 
To which the reply is : "If there is one fact which is impressed 
on the conviction of the observer with more force than 
any other, it is the persistence and uniformity of the characters 
of the molar teeth in the earliest known Mammoth and 
his most modern successor. . . . Assuming the observation 
to be correct, what strong proof does it not afford of the persistence 
and constancy, throughout vast intervals of time, of 
the distinctive characters of those organs which are most concerned 
in the existence and habits of the species ? If we cast 
a glance back on. the long vista of physical changes which our 
planet has undergone since the Neozoic Epoch, we can nowhere 
detect signs of a revolution more sudden and pronounced, or 
more important in its results, than the intercalation and sudden 
disappearance of the glacial period. Yet the ' dicyclotherian' 
Mammoth lived before it, and passed through the 
ordeal of all the hard extremities it involved, bearing his 
organs of locomotion and digestion all but unchanged. Taking 
the group of four European fossil species above enumerated, 
do they show any signs in the successive deposits of 
a transition from the one form into the other ? Here again 
the result of my observation, in so far as it has extended over 
the European area, is, that the specific characters of the 
molars are constant in each, within a moderate range of variation, 
and that we nowhere meet with intermediate forms." 
Dr. Falconer continues (p. 80) : — 
" The inferences which I draw from these facts are not opposed 
to one of the leading propositions of Darwin's theory. With him, I 
have no faith in the opinion that the Mammoth and other extinct 
Elephants made their appearance suddenly, after the type in which 
their fossil remains are presented to us. The most rational view 
seems to he, that they are in some shape the modified descendants 
of earlier progenitors. But if the asserted facts be correct, they 
seem clearly to indicate that the older elephants of Europe, such as 
E. mericlionalis and E. antiquus, were not the stocks from which 
the later species, IF. primigenius and E. Africanus, sprung, and 
that we must look elsewhere for their origin. The nearest affinity, 
and that a very close one, of the European E. mericlionalis is with 
the Miocene E. planifrons of India ; and of E. primigenius, with 
the existing India species. 
"Another reflexion is equally strong in my mind, — that the 
means which have been adduced to explain the origin of the species 
by ' Natural Selection,' or a process of variation from external influences, 
are inadequate to account for the phenomena. The law of 
phyllotaxis, which governs the evolution of leaves around the axis 
°t a plant, is as nearly constant in its manifestation as any of the 
physical laws connected with the material world. Each instance, 
However different from another, can be shown to be a term of some 
series of continued fractions. When this is coupled with the geometrical 
law governing the evolution of form, so manifest in some 
departments of the animal kingdom, e. g., the spiral shells of the 
Alollusca, it is difficult to believe that there is not, in nature, a 
deeper-seated and innate principle, to the operation of which Natural 
selection is merely an adjunct. The whole range of the Mammalia, 
fossil and recent, cannot furnish a species which has had a wider 
geographical distribution, and passed through a longer term of time, 
an d through more extreme changes of climatal conditions, than the 
Mammoth. If species are so unstable, and so susceptible of mutation 
through such influences, why does that extinct form stand out so 
Sl gnally a monument of stability ? By his admirable researches and 
earnest writings, Darwin has, beyond all his cotemporaries, <n Y cn 
an impulse to the philosophical investigation of the most backward 
and obscure branch of the biological sciences of his day ; he has laid 
the foundations of a great edifice ; but he need not be surprised, if, 
in the progress of erection, the superstructure is altered by his successors, 
like the Duomo of Milan from the Roman to a different 
style of architecture." 
Entertaining ourselves the opinion that something more 
than natural selection is requisite to account for the orderly 
production and succession of species, we offer two incidental 
remarks upon the above extract. 
First, we find in it —in the phrase " Natural Selection, or 
a process of variation from external influences " — an example 
of the very common confusion of two distinct things, namely, 
variation and natural selection. The former has never yet 
been shown to have its cause in " external influences," nor to 
occur at random. As we have elsewhere insisted, if not inexplicable, 
it has never been explained ; all we can yet say is, 
that plants and animals are prone to vary, and that some conditions 
favor variation. Perhaps in this Dr. Falconer may 
yet find what he seeks : for "it is difficult to believe that 
there is not in [its] nature, a deeper-seated and innate principle, 
to the operation of which Natural Selection is merely an 
adjunct." The latter, which is the ensemble of the external 
influences, including the competition of the individuals themselves, 
picks out certain variations as they arise, but in no 
proper sense can be said to originate them. 
Secondly, although we are not quite sure how Dr. Falconer 
intends to apply the law of phyllotaxis to illustrate his idea, 
we fancy that a pertinent illustration may be drawn from it, 
in this way. There are two species of phyllotaxis, perfectly 
distinct, and, we suppose, not mathematically reducible the 
one to the other, — namely, 1, that of alternate leaves, with 
its varieties ; and 2, that of verticillate leaves, of which 
opposite leaves present the simplest case. That, although 
generally constant, a change from one variety of alternate 
phyllotaxis to another should occur on the same axis, or on 
successive axes, is not surprising, the different sorts being 
terms of a regular series, — although indeed we have not the 
least idea as to how the change from the one to the other 
comes to pass. But it is interesting, and in this connection 
perhaps instructive, to remark that, while some dicotyledonous 
plants hold to the verticillate, i. e., opposite-leaved phyllotaxis 
throughout, a larger number — through the operation of somo 
deep-seated and innate principle, which we cannot fathom — 
change abruptly into the other species at the second or third 
node, and change back again in the flower, or else effect a 
synthesis of the two species in a manner which is puzzling to 
understand. Here is a change from one fixed law to another, 
as unaccountable, if not as great, as from one specific form 
to another. 
An elaborate paper on the vegetation of the Tertiary period 
m the southeast of France, by Count Gaston de Saporta, published 
in " Annales des Sciences Naturelles," xvi. pp. 309- 
— which we have not space to analyze, —is worthy of 
attention from the general inquirer, on account of its analysis 
of the Tertiary flora into its separate types, Cretaceous, Austral, 
Tropical, and Boreal, each of which has its separate and 
different history, — and for the announcement that " the hiatus, 
which, in the idea of most geologists, intervened between 
the close of the Cretaceous and the beginning of the Tertiary, 
appears to have had no existence, so far as concerns the vegetation 
; that in general it was not by means of a total overthrow, 
followed by a complete new emission of species, that 
the flora has been renewed at each successive period ; and 
at while the plants of southern Europe inherited from the 
Cretaceous period more or less rapidly disappeared, as also 
the austral forms, and later the tropical types (except the 
-Laurel, the Myrtle, and the Chammrops humilis), the boreal 
types, coming later, survived all the others, and now compose, 
either in Europe, or in the north of Asia, or in North America, 
the basis of the actual arborescent vegetation." Especially 
a very considerable number of forms nearly identical with 
Tertiary forms now exist in America, where they have found, 
more easily than in our [European] soil, — less vast and less 
extended southward, — refuge from ulterior revolutions." The 
extinction of species is attributed to two kinds of causes : the 
one material or physical, whether slow or rapid ; the other 
inherent in the nature of organic beings, incessant, but slow, 
in a manner latent, but somehow assigning to the species, as 
to the individuals, a limited period of existence, and, in some 
equally mysterious but wholly natural way, connected with 
the development of organic types : — "By type meaning a collection 
of vegetable forms constructed upon the same plan of 
organization, of which they reproduce the essential lineaments 
with certain secondary modifications, and which appear to run 
back to a common point of departure." 
In this community of types, no less than in the community 
of certain existing species, Saporta recognizes a prolonged 
material union between North America and Europe in former 
times. Most naturalists and geologists reason in the same 
way, — some more cautiously than others, — yet perhaps most 
of them seem not to perceive how far such inferences imply 
the doctrine of the common origin of related species. 
For obvious reasons such doctrines are likely to find more 
favor with botanists than with zoologists. But with both the 
advance in this direction is seen to have been rapid and great ; 
yet to us not unexpected. We note, also, an evident disposition, 
notwithstanding some endeavors to the contrary, to allow 
derivative hypotheses to stand or fall upon their own merits, 
■ — to have indeed upon philosophical grounds certain presumptions 
in their favor, — and to be, perhaps, quite as capable 
of being turned to good account as to bad account in 
natural theology. 1 
1 What tho Rev. Principal Tulloch remarks in respect to the philosophy 
of miracles has a pertinent application here. We quote at second hand : 
" The stoutest advocates of interference can mean nothing more than 
that the Supreme Will has so moved the hidden springs of nature that a 
new issue arises on given circumstances. The ordinary issue is supplanted 
by a higher issue. The essential facts before us are a certain set of phenomena, 
and a Higher Will moving them. How moving them ?is a question 
for human definition ; the answer to which does not and cannot affect 
the divine meaning of the change. Yet when we reflect that this Higher 
Will is everywhere reason and wisdom, it seems a juster as well as a more 
comprehensive view to regard it as operating by subordination and evolution 
rather than by interference or violation." 
Among the leading naturalists, indeed, such views — taken 
in the widest sense — have one and, so far as we are now 
aware, only one thorough-going and thoroughly consistent 
opponent, namely, Mr. Agassiz. 
Most naturalists take into their very conception of a species, 
explicitly or by implication, the notion of a material connection 
resulting from the descent of the individuals composing 
it from a common stock, of local origin. Mr. Agassiz wholly 
eliminates community of descent from his idea of species, and 
even conceives a species to have been as numerous in individuals, 
and as widespread over space, or as segregated in discontinuous 
spaces, from the first as at a later period. 
The station which it inhabits, therefore, is with other naturalists 
in nowise essential to the species, and may not have 
been the region of its origin. In Mr. Agassiz's view the habitat 
is supposed to mark the origin, and to be a part of the 
character of the species. The habitat is not merely the place 
where it is, but a part of what it is. 
Most naturalists recognize varieties of species ; and many, 
nke De Candolle, have come to conclude that varieties of the 
■highest grade, or races, so far partake of the characteristics of 
species, and are so far governed by the same laws, that it is 
often very difficult to draw a clear and certain distinction between 
the two. Mr. Agassiz will not allow that varieties or 
races exist in nature, apart from man's agency. 
Most naturalists believe that the origin of species is supernatural, 
their dispersion or particular geographical area, natural, 
and their extinction, when they disappear, also the result 
of physical causes. In the view of Mr. Agassiz, if rightly 
understood, all three are equally independent of physical cause 
and effect, are equally supernatural. 
In comparing preceding periods with the present and with 
each other, most naturalists and palaeontologists now appear 
to recognize a certain number of species as having survived 
from one epoch to the next, or even through more than one 
formation, especially from the Tertiary into the Bost-tertiary 
period, and from that to the present age. Mr. Agassiz is 
understood to believe in total extinctions and total new crea- 
tions at each successive epoch, and even to recognize no existing 
species as ever contemporary with extinct ones, except in 
the case of recent exterminations. 
These peculiar views, if sustained, will effectually dispose of 
every form of derivative hypothesis. 
Beturning for a moment to De Candolle's article, we are disposed 
to notice his criticism of Linnaeus's " definition " of the 
term species (" Bhilosophia Botanica," No. 157) : " Species 
tot numeramus quot diversae formae in principio sunt creatae," 
— which he declares illogical, inapplicable, and the worst that 
has been propounded. " So, to determine if a form is specific, 
it is necessary to go back to its origin, which is impossible. 
A definition by a character which can never be verified is no 
definition at all." 
Now, as Linnaeus practically applied the idea of species with 
a sagacity which has never been surpassed, and rarely equalled, 
and indeed may be said to have fixed its received meaning in 
natural history, it may well be inferred that in the phrase 
above cited he did not so much undertake to frame a logical 
definition, as to set forth the idea which, in his opinion, lay 
at the foundation of species. On which basis A. L. Jussieu 
did construct a logical definition : " nunc rectius definitur perennis 
individuorum similium successio continuata generatione 
renascentium." The fundamental idea of species, we would 
still maintain, is that of a chain, of which genetically-connected 
individuals are the links. That, in the practical recognition 
of species, the essential characteristic has to be inferred, 
is no great objection, — the general fact that like 
engenders like being an induction from a vast number of instances, 
and the only assumption being that of the uniformity 
of nature. The idea of gravitation, that of the atomic constitution 
of matter, and the like, equally have to be verified inferentially. 
If we still hold to the idea of Linnaeus, and of 
Agassiz, that existing species were created independently, and 
essentially all at once at the beginning of the present era, we 
could not better the propositions of Linnaeus and of Jussieu. 
If, on the other hand, the time has come in which we may accept, 
with De Candolle, their successive origination, at the com- 
VARIATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES. 119 
mencement of the present era or before, and even by derivation 
from other forms, then the "in principio " of Linnaeus 
will refer to that time, whenever it was, and his proposition be 
as sound and wise as ever. 
In his "Geographie Botanique " (ii. pp. 1068-1077) De 
Candolle discusses this subject at length, and in the same 
interest. Remarking that of the two great facts of species, 
namely, likeness among the individuals, and genealogical connection, 
zoologists have generally preferred the latter, 1 while 
botanists have been divided in opinion, he pronounces for the 
former as the essential thing, in the following argumentative 
statement : — 
" Quant a moi, j'ai 6t6 conduit, dans ma definition de l'espece, a 
mettre decidement la ressemblance au-dessus des caracteres de suc- 
cession. Ce n'est pas seulement a cause des circonstances propres au 
regne ve'ge'tal, dont je m'occupe exclusivement ; ce n'est pas non plus 
afin de sortir ma definition des theories et de la rendre le plus possible 
utile aux naturalistes descripteurs et nomenclateurs, c'est aussi 
Parun motif philosophique. En toute chose il faut aller au fond des 
questions, quand on le peut. Or, pourquoi la reproduction est-elle 
Possible, habituelle, feconde indiffiniment, entre des etres organises 
que nous dirons de la meme espece ? Parce qu'ils se ressemblent et 
uniquement a cause de cola. Lorsque deux especes ne peuvent,^ ou, 
s 'd s'agit d'animaux supe"rieurs, ne peuvent et ne veulent se croiser, 
c'est qu'elles sont trfes differentes. Si Ton obtient des croisements, 
c'est que les individus sont analogues ; si ces croisements donnentdes 
Produits fe'conds, c'est que les individus etaient plus analogues ; si 
ces produits eux-memes sont fe'conds, c'est que la ressemblance e"tait 
Plus grande ; s'ils sont fe'cond habituellement et indeTmiment, c'est 
que la ressemblance interieure et exterieure grande. Amsi 
!e degre" de ressemblance est le fond ; la reproduction en est seulement 
la manifestation et la mesure, et il est logique de placer la 
cause au-dessus de l'effet." 
We are not at all convinced. We still hold that genealogical 
connection, rather than mutual resemblance, is the fundamental 
thing, first on the ground of fact, and then from the 
1 Particularly citing Flourens : "La ressemblance n'est qu'une condition 
secondaire ; la condition essentielle est la descendance : ce n'est pas 
la ressemblance, c'est la succession des individus, qui fait l'espece." 
philosophy of the case. Bractically, no botanist can say what 
amount of dissimilarity is compatible with unity of species ; 
in wild plants it is sometimes very great, in cultivated races, 
often enormous. De Candolle himself informs us that the different 
variations which the same Oak tree exhibits are significant 
indications of a disposition to set up separate varieties, 
which, becoming hereditary, may constitute a race ; he evidently 
looks upon the extreme forms, say of Quercus Robur, 
as having thus originated ; and on this ground, inferred from 
transitional forms, and not from their mutual resemblance, as 
we suppose, he includes them in that species. This will be 
more apparent should the discovery of the transitions, which 
he leads us to expect, hereafter cause the four provisional 
species which attend Q. Robur to be merged in that species. 
It may rightly be replied that this conclusion would be arrived 
at from the likeness step by step in the series of forms ; but 
the cause of the likeness here is obvious. And this brings in 
our " motif philosophique." 
Not to insist that the likeness is after all the variable, not 
the constant, element, —to learn which is the essential thing, 
resemblance among the individuals or their genetic connection, 
we have only to ask which can be the cause of the other. 
In hermaphrodite plants (the normal case), and even as 
the question is ingeniously put by De Candolle in the above 
extract, the former surely cannot be the cause of the latter, 
though it may, in case of crossing, offer occasion. But, on 
the ground of the most fundamental of all things in the constitution 
of plants and animals, " the fact incapable of farther 
analysis, that individuals reproduce their like, that characteristics 
are inheritable," the likeness is a direct natural consequence 
of the genetic succession, — and it is logical to place 
the cause above the effect. 
We are equally disposed to combat a proposition of De 
Candolle's about genera, elaborately argued in the " Geographie 
Botanique," and incidentally re-affirmed in his present article, 
namely, that genera are more natural than species, and are 
more correctly distinguished by people in general, as is shown 
by vernacular names. But we have no space left in which to 
present some evidence to the contrary. 
Here we must abruptly close our long exposition of a paper 
which, from the scientific position, ability, and impartiality of 
its author, is likely at this time to produce a marked impression. 
We would also direct attention to an earlier article in 
the same important periodical (namely, in the " Bibliotheque 
Universelle " for May, 1862), on the European Flora and the 
Configuration of Continents in the Tertiary Epoch, a most 
interesting abstract of, and commentary on, the introductory 
part of Heer's " Flora Tertiaria Helvetia," as reedited and 
translated into the French by Gaudin, with additions by the 
author. 
DR. HOOKER ON WELWITSCHIA. 
This is a separate issue, in folio form, of a memoir 1 in the 
current (24) volume of the Transactions of the Linnsean 
society of London, illustrated by fourteen superb and elabo- 
r ate plates, the expense of which has been mainly defrayed by 
the Royal Society, from a parliamentary fund placed at its 
disposal for the promotion of scientific research. By the cooperation 
of these two learned societies, the fruits of Dr. 
-^looker's admirable researches are given to the scientific 
world in a form and manner worthy of them and of the wonderful 
subject. 
A good idea of the vegetable wonder in question is given in 
wie following brief account of its appearance and prominent 
characters, drawn partly from the descriptions of its discoverer, 
and partly from specimens sent to England : — 
" The Welwitschia is a woody plant, said to attain a century 
ln duration, with an obconic trunk about two feet long, of 
which a few inches rise above the soil, presenting the appearance 
of a flat, two-lobed depressed mass, sometimes (according 
to Dr. Welwitsch) attaining fourteen feet in circumference (!), 
and looking like a round table. When full grown it is dark 
brown, hard, and cracked over the whole surface (much like 
On the Welwitschia, a new genus of Gnetacece. By Joseph Dalton 
■Hooker. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxvi. 434.) 
the burnt crust of a loaf of bread) ; the lower portion forms 
a stout tap-root, buried in the soil, and branching downward 
at the end. From deep grooves in the circumference of the 
depressed mass two enormous leaves are given off, each six 
feet long when full grown, one corresponding to each lobe ; 
these are quite flat, linear, very leathery, and are split to the 
base into innumerable thongs that lie curling upon the surface 
of the soil. Its discoverer describes these same two 
leaves as being present from the earliest condition of the 
plant, and assures me that they are in fact developed from the 
two cotyledons of the seed, and are persistent, being replaced 
by no others. From the circumference of the tabular mass, 
above, but close to the insertion of the leaves, spring stout, 
dichotomously branched cymes, nearly a foot high, bearingsmall 
erect scarlet cones, which eventually become oblong, and 
attain the size of those of the common Spruce Fir. The scales 
of the cones are very closely imbricated, and contain, when 
young and still very small, solitary flowers, which in some 
cones are hermaphrodite (structurally but not functionally), 
in others female. The hermaphrodite flower consists of a 
perianth of four pieces, six monadelphous stamens, with globose 
trilocular anthers, surrounding a central ovule, the integument 
of which is produced into a styliform sigmoid tube, 
terminated by a discoid apex. The female flower consists of 
a solitary erect ovule, contained in a compressed utricular 
perianth. The mature cone is tetragonous, and contains a 
broadly winged fruit in each scale. Its discoverer observes 
that the whole plant exudes a resin, and that it is called 
Tumbo by the natives, — whence he suggests that it may bear 
the generic name of Tumboa; but this he withdrew at my 
suggestion, for reasons which I shall presently give. It inhabits 
the elevated sandy plateau near Cape Negro (lat. 15° 
40' S.) on the southwest coast of Africa." 
Welwitschia mirabilis, Hook, fil., was also detected and 
made known — indeed the first actual materials, with a drawing 
of the plant, were sent to England — by Mr. Baines from 
the Damara country, in lat. 24° or 24° S., about 500 miles 
south of Cape Negro. Mr. Baines is an artist, and his original 
colored sketch of a plant in fruit is reproduced on the first 
plate of the memoir. It appears as if five-leaved ; but probably 
one of the two original leaves is split in two, and the 
other into three segments. As might be inferred from the 
form and structure, the Welwitschia inhabits a dry region. 
Mr. Monteiro writes to Dr. Hooker : — ■ 
"... About thirty miles distant from the coast, I passed 
a plain about three miles across, on which this plant was 
growing abundantly ; that is to say, I saw about thirty specimens 
on my line of march. The plain was perfectly dry, and 
bare of other vegetation than the Welwitschia and a little 
short grass. The ground was a hard quartzose schist. The 
Welwitschia was generally growing near the little ruts worn 
in the plain by running water during the rainy season." 
And from Damara Land, Mr. Anderson writes that, — 
" Rain rarely or never falls where this plant exists. (Yet 
the night dews are heavy, as other authorities mention.) I 
have crossed and recrossed Damara Land throughout its entire 
length and breadth, but only found the plant growing on 
that desperately arid flat, stretching far and wide about Walvisch 
Bay." 
We are familiar with plants of very diverse orders of Dicotyledons 
and Monocotyledons which are adapted to arid 
regions by great restriction of surface. Here a similar plan 
is adopted by a Gymnosperm ; for the resemblance to Coniferce 
and Casuarinem indicated by Dr. Welwitsch is shown 
by Dr. Hooker to import a close affinity, the author referring 
the plant to Gnetacem near to Ephedra. Its permanently 
abbreviated ascending axis —of which the greater part consists 
of the first internode, below the cotyledons — increases 
m thickness but hardly in length, develops no other than the 
seminal pair of leaves, above which the disciform bilobate 
axile portion or " crown," gradually produced, bears year by 
year only leafless inflorescence. 
Haemanthus equally bears a pair of leaves ; but these die 
off as the season of drought advances, when the plant is 
reduced to a minimum of surface in its spherical bulb, — 
which outspreads a new pair of leaves when the rainy season 
returns. But in Welwitschia the two leaves are permanent. 
Wherefore they are firm and coriaceous, and, increasing by 
basal growth from year to year, the older parts doubtless 
become inactive at length, while fresh surface below is annually 
renewed, under the shelter (as Dr. Hooker describes) 
afforded by the deep grooves which in old plants separate the 
growth of the hypocotyledonary stock from that of the crown 
above, and is filled by the tender growing bases of the leaves. 
Having given a detailed generic character of Welwitschia 
and a comparative view of the Gnetaceous genera, now three 
in number, Dr. Hooker proceeds to describe at length the 
trunk, leaves, inflorescence, flowers, fertilization, embryogeny, 
and seeds of this curious subject, — comparing it, in the latter 
respects, with Coniferm and Gycadacece on the one hand, and 
with Santalum and Loranthus on the other, and closing with 
a general summary of the results. 
An abstract or analysis of this most important paper is 
beyond our present reach and space. But we may refer to 
some of the special points. 
The most obvious peculiarity of Welwitschia is, that " it 
appears to be the only perennial flowering plant which at no 
period has other vegetative organs than those proper to the 
embryo itself, — the main axis being represented by the radicle, 
which becomes a gigantic caulicle, and develops a root 
from its base and inflorescences from its plumulary end, and 
the leaves being the two cotyledons in a very highly developed 
and specialized condition." It is an excellent case, accordingly, 
if any such were still needed for showing the nature 
of the radicle as stem, or ascending axis (not root), — a view 
which we supposed observation had long ago demonstrated. 
Dr. Hooker, in a note, refers to this view as expressed by 
Adr. de Jussieu in his " Cours Elementaire " (which appeared 
in 1843 and 1844), and in Gray's Introduction to Botany 
(" Botanical Text Book "), 1858. But the same view is taken 
in all the earlier editions of the latter work ; even in the first 
(1842) the radicle is spoken of as the first internode of the 
stem (p. 28, note) ; and probably the idea will be found distinctly 
expressed in works of an earlier date. Dr. Hooker, 
in the note referred to, assents to the proposition that " the 
radicle is rightly regarded as an axis," i. e., an ascending 
axis, " and not a root," but does not agree that it is an internode. 
To us, the one implies the other. Conceivino-, as 
we do, the fundamental idea of the morphology of the phsenogamous 
plant to be, that the ascending axis consists of a 
series of superposed internodes, each crowned by a leaf-bearing 
point or ring (the node), the first internode must needs 
be that which is crowned by the first leaf or pair of leaves, 
the cotyledons ; and its whole development confirms this view. 
Dr. Hooker notes the curious fact that in Welwitschia 
flower-buds are occasionally produced on the stock below the 
insertion of the leaves, that is on the radicle or caulicle itself 
; and Dr. Masters pointed out to him analogous cases of 
shoots thus originating, one of which was described by Bernhardi 
thirty years ago. It is simply the case of adventitious 
buds ; these might seem as likely to occur on the first internode 
as on any later one. 
Welwitschia, having a dicotyledonous embryo, has also 
essentially an exogenous stem, i. e., "the vascular system is 
referable to the exogenous plan, but its arrangement into 
concentric wood wedges is very rude." But the superadded 
isolated and closed vascular bundles of the stock and root, and 
especially their losing themselves in the periphery of the 
stock, are endogenous analogies. So also is the strictly parallel 
and free venation of the leaves ; yet, as there are no 
cross veinlets, thus favoring the splitting up of the leaf into 
laciniae, this looks as much or more towards Cycadacem and 
broad-leaved Ooniferm. 
The total absence of anastomosing veinlets in the leaf, each 
nerve representing a single and independent vascular axis, 
extending, in Welwitschia, from the axis of the trunk to the 
apex of the leaf, causes such leaves as these and those of 
Dammara, etc., to " resemble more closely a series of parallel 
uninerved leaves united by cellular tissue, than a foliar expansion 
of parenchyma traversed by one system of inosculating 
vessels, and the frequent presence of many linear cotyledons 
in these plants seems to favor this view, as does the 
mixed character of the foliage of Podocarpus, of which some 
species have uninerved and others many-nerved leaves. The 
numerous flower-buds along the periphery of the crown also 
further favor this view." That is, in Welwitschia, where 
this ingenious surmise carries a plausibility, which it does not 
when applied to Podocarpus. 
The binary symmetry of Welwitschia, beginning with the 
cotyledons, is carried through the inflorescence up to the decussating 
pairs of bracts of the cones and the two leaflets in 
each whorl of ' the hermaphrodite perianth. But the stamens 
are six, at first sight a monocotyledonous analogy ; yet they 
may be regarded three sets of two, notwithstanding their 
monadelphy. The flowers are dicecio-polygamous, i. e., of 
two sorts, one female, the other structurally hermaphrodite, 
but the gynaecium sterile, though well-developed, except that 
no embryo-sac appears. The hermaphrodite cones and their 
flowers accord in many respects strikingly with the male cones 
of Ephedra ; but the anthers are trilocular, which is remarkable. 
The simple ellipsoidal pollen is the same in both. In 
Ephedra the stamens vary from two to eight, and the column 
is solid, there being no rudiment of a gynaecium. 
The female fruitful cones are about three inches long, and 
bright red when fresh. 
The integument of the ovule, as in Gnetum, is prolonged 
at the summit into a style-like body, thus closely simulating 
a pistil ; and the apex of this styliform tube, which is thin 
and merely erose in the fertile flower, in the structurally 
hermaphrodite flower is dilated into a broad papillose disk, 
exactly imitating a highly developed stigma — a marked instance 
of a highly developed organ which is functionless ; for 
no pollen has been detected upon it, and no embryo-sac in 
the nucleus. Here Dr. Hooker speculates upon " the possibility 
of Welwitschia being the only known representative 
of an existing or extinct race of plants, in which such a 
stigma-like organ was really capable of performing the function 
of a stigma. And, when we see this organ occurring in 
a hermaphrodite flower, it is easy to suppose that we have in 
Welwitschia a transition in function, as well as in structure, 
between the gymnospermous and angiospermous Dicotyledons ; 
and that the ideal race consisted of hermaphrodite plants, in 
which the office of the stigma of the carpellary leaf was performed 
by a stigmatic dilatation of the ovular coat itself." 
This assumes that the gymnospermous theory established 
by Brown is correct (whatever be the nature of the conescales, 
rameal or carpellary, simple or compound), and applicable 
to the Gnetaceous as well as to the Coniferous type. 
This view, lately much questioned, Dr. Hooker maintains, 
and enforces, as respects Gnetacem, by very convincing and 
in part wholly original arguments, drawn from his own researches 
upon the present plant and its allies. We refer to 
pp. 28 to 31, which we could not readily condense, and have 
not room to copy. The same is to be said in regard to the 
resemblances or analogies in gynaecial structure between 
Gnetacem and Boranthacem, etc., — a subject upon which we 
await expectantly Professor Oliver's investigations. Moreover, 
as Dr. Hooker remarks upon another page, the decisive 
or final comparative view of the structures in question cannot 
be had until the homology of the ovule itself is settled. In 
cases where the flower is so simplified that the nucleus of 
an ovule directly terminates the floriferous axis, and is surrounded 
by few and simple, or peculiarly specialized, investments, 
the discrimination of these must be difficult enough, 
and must ultimately depend upon the theory adopted as to 
the nature of the ovular coats. If these be regarded as foliar 
(as a rigid application of adopted morphological principles 
will require), then a complete transition from gymnospermy 
to angiospermy is probable, and may be expected to be demonstrable. 

The fertilization and embryology of Welwitschia have been 
wonderfully worked out, considering the materials, by Dr. 
Hooker, and the two most elaborate and valuable plates of 
the memoir are filled with the details. Suffice it to say, that 
it appears that the pollen must be brought by insects to the 
ovule of the female flowers, at an early period, before the 
nucleus is covered by the ovular coat or by the perianth, and 
before the former has produced its styliform apex, down 
which it would be nearly impossible to convey the grains of 
pollen which were bodily found on the nucleus, with their 
tubes there produced. So that, notwithstanding the carpel-like 
form of the ovule, the impregnation is absolutely gymnospermous. 
As to embryo-formation also, " there is a general 
agreement in many most essential particulars with Cycadacem 
and Coniferm," especially, and beyond what has 
already been adverted to, in "the free embryo-sac being 
filled with endosperm-cells previous to fertilization, the numerous 
secondary embryo-sacs, the position of the germinal 
vesicle at the base of these sacs, and in the high development 
of the long tortuous suspensor." There is an agreement with 
Angiosperms, however, in several particulars, especially in 
that of " the germinal vesicle giving rise to one embryo only." 
And it is concluded that, in special reference to Sentalum 
and Loranthus, " Welwitschia presents an embryogenic process 
intermediate between that of Gymnosperms and Angiosperms." 

And here we should not omit to mention that its wood 
differs from that of all known Gymnosperms in wanting the 
disc-bearing wood-cells ! 
It will be conceded that Welwitschia is " the most wonderful 
discovery, in a botanical point of view, that has been 
brought to light during the present, century." Also, that Dr. 
Hooker has enjoyed (and improved) an opportunity unequalled 
by any botanist since that which placed the Eafflesia 
in Mr. Brown's hands. 
DARWIN'S MOVEMENTS AND HABITS OF CLIMBING 
PLANTS. 
This is a long paper 1 read before the Linnaean Society 
in February last. The investigations which it records were 
made, we believe, during a period when the author's ordinary 
1 On the Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants. By Charles Darwin. 
Journal Linnaean Society of London, ix. London, 1867. (American Journal 
of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xl. 273 ; xli. 125.) 
scientific labors were interrupted by illness, —as was no less 
the case with respect to his former papers on Dimorphous and 
Trimorphous Flowers and his volume on the Fertilization of 
Orchids by the aid of Insects. Of these works and of the 
present, — side issues as they are, — it may fairly be said, that 
they show a genius for biological investigation, and a power 
of turning common materials and ordinary observations to high 
scientific account, which, if equalled, have not been surpassed 
since the days of Hunter and Charles Bell. This will be the 
opinion equally, we suppose, of those who favor and of those 
who dislike Mr. Darwin's theory of the gradual transformation 
of specific forms through natural selection, upon which, 
indeed, all these collateral researches have a bearing, direct or 
incidental. In the present case the bearing is obvious. The 
gradual acquisition by certain plants of advantageous peculiarities 
is inferred from the gradation of forms and functions. 
Properties and powers which are latent or feebly developed 
in most plants are taken advantage of by some, made specially 
useful, and enhanced from generation to generation. Tendrilbearing 
plants, the most specialized in structure and the most 
exquisitely adapted to the end in view, are supposed to have 
been derived from leaf-climbers, and these in turn from simple 
twiners. 
The author states that he was led to this subject by a brief 
note, communicated to the American Academy in the summer 
of 1858 (and reprinted in this Journal), in which the writer 
of the present notice recorded his observation of the coding 
of certain tendrils by a visible movement promptly following 
an extraneous irritation. Mr. Darwin's observations were 
more than half completed before he became aware that the 
spontaneous revolution of the stems and of some tendrils of 
climbing plants had been observed and recorded almost forty 
years ago, and nearly at the same time, by Palm and by Von 
Mold, and had been the subject of two memoirs by Dutrochet, 
published more than twenty years ago. But the mode in 
which the free and growing end of a stem sweeps around 
seems not to have been previously well made out, having been 
more or less confounded with the torsion of the axis which 
many twining stems, such as those of the Hop and the Morning 
Glory, arc apt to undergo. It is plain to see, however, 
that many stems which revolve do not twist at all ; and those 
that do never could twist on their axis at every revolution 
without speedy destruction, - — indeed usually do not twist until 
they have ceased revolving. Every one must have noticed that 
the growing extremity of a Hop, Convolvulus, or other twiner, 
when unsupported, hangs over or stretches out horizontally to 
one side. But it is not so well known that this outstretched 
portion, while at the proper age, is continually sweeping 
round, in circles widening as it grows, and always in the same 
direction, in search of some object round wddch to twine. The 
Hop revolves with the sun ; the Convolvulus, Bean (Phaseolus), 
etc., against the sun, that is, in the same directions that 
they twine. Two or three internodes are usually revolving at 
the same time. Mr. Darwin observed thirty-seven revolutions 
in one internode of a Hop, — the first revolution made in about 
twenty-four hours, the second in nine hours, the third and the 
following ones up to the eighth in a little over three hours 
each. " The shoot had now grown 3|- inches in length, and 
carried at its extremity a young internode an inch in length, 
which showed slight changes in its curvature. The next or 
ninth revolution was effected in two hours and thirty minutes. 
From this time forward the revolutions were easily observed. 
The thirty-sixth revolution was performed at the usual rate ; 
so was the last or thirty-seventh, but it was not quite completed 
; for the internode abruptly became upright, and after 
moving to the centre became motionless. I tied a weight to 
its upper end, so as slightly to bow it, and thus to detect any 
movement ; but there was none. Some time before the last 
revolution the lower part of the internode had ceased to move. 
... It moved during five days ; but the more rapid movement 
after the third revolution lasted during three days and 
twenty hours. The regular revolutions from the 9th to the 
36 th inclusive, were performed at the average rate of 2 h. 
31 m. The weather was cold, and this affected the temperature 
of the room, especially during the night, and consequently 
retarded a little the rate of movement. . . . After the seven- 
teenth revolution the internode had grown from 1| to 6 inches 
in length, and carried an internode 1£ inch long, which was 
just perceptibly moving ; and this carried a very minute ultimate 
internode. After the 21st revolution the penultimate 
internode was 2 }- inches long, and probably revolved in a 
period of about three hours. At the 27th revolution our 
lower internode was B|, the penultimate 3-|, and the ultimate 
212 1 inches in length; and the inclination of the whole shoot 
was such that a circle 19 inches in diameter was swept by it. 
When the movement ceased the lower internode was 9 and 
the penultimate 6 inches in length ; so that, from the 27th to 
the 37th revolutions inclusive, three internodes were at the 
same time revolving." — (pp. 3, 4.) 
The shoots of many climbers sweep their circles more 
rapidly than the Hop, the common Pole Bean {Phaseolus 
vulgaris') in rather less than two hours, Convolvuluses of various 
species in the same time or rather less; while more 
woody stems naturally move more slowly, some requiring from 
24 to 50 hours for each revolution. But the thickness or texture 
of the shoot does not govern the rate, many slender shoots 
moving slower than some stout ones, and some lignescent 
quicker than other purely herbaceous ones. The movement 
appears to be accelerated, up to a certain point, by raising the 
temperature, or rather is retarded by lowering it ; but while 
the conditions are nearly the same, the rate is often remarkably 
uniform. The quickest rate of revolution of a proper 
stem observed by Mr. Darwin was that of a Scyphranthus, in 
77 minutes. When the light comes from one side, the semicircle 
towards the light is usually described in less time, often 
in less than half the time, of that from the light. The tendency 
of young stems to turn toward the light is here active 
as usual, but is overcome by a superior force. The end of 
the shoot describes circles or broad ellipses, or else, from insufficient 
power or mechanical disadvantages, narrow ellipses, 
semicircles, or irregular figures. A horizontal shoot of considerable 
length will thus be found, not unfrequently, to sway 
from side to side in a semicircular course, while the extreme 
internodes are making complete revolutions. 
A striking illustration of the amount of space that may be 
swept over is afforded by a case in which Mr. Darwin allowed 
the top of a Ceropegia to grow out almost horizontally to the 
length of 31 inches, — three long internodes terminated by two 
short ones. The whole revolved at rates between b\ and 6| 
hours for each revolution, the tip sweeping a circle of above 
five feet in diameter and 16 feet in circumference, traveling 
therefore at the rate of at least 32 inches per hour. "It was 
an interesting spectacle to watch the long shoot sweeping, 
night and day, this grand circle, in search of some object 
around which to twine." 
As to the nature of this revolving movement, Mr. Darwin 
clearly shows that it is not a torsion of the axis, but a successive 
bending (similar to that by which ordinary stems bend 
toward the light), the direction of which is constantly and 
uniformly changing. "If a colored streak be painted (this 
was done with a large number of twining plants) along, we 
will say, the convex line of surface, this colored streak will, 
aifter a time depending on the rate of revolution, be found to 
lie along one side of the bow, then along the concave side, 
then on the opposite side, and, lastly, again on the opposite 
convex surface. This clearly proves that the internodes, during 
the revolving movement, become bowed in every direction. 
The movement is, in fact, a continuous self-bowing of the 
whole shoot, successively directed to all points of the compass." 
It is an automatic movement, of the same character 
as those which these and other parts of plants effect in changing 
position or direction, sometimes slowly and sometimes with 
a visible motion. The movement may be likened in one case 
to that of the hour-hand or the minute-hand of a clock, in the 
other to the second-hand, but in both is as truly a vital movement 
as is the contraction of an involuntary muscle. It must 
be effected — as Mr. Darwin recognizes — either by the contraction 
of the cells on the concave side, or by the turgescence 
and elongation of those on the convex side of the internode, 
or by both, — probably the former, as various facts go to show ; 
but questions of that kind are not investigated in the present 
essay. 
No differences in this regard are observable in the behavior 
of exogenous or endogenous stems, or even of those of climbing 
Ferns. Lygodium scandens, according to Darwin, revolves 
like other twiners ; it completes its revolutions in six 
hours, or on a very hot day in five (moving against the sun, 
which is much the commoner case) ; this is about the average 
rate of Phamogamous twiners, like which it comports itself 
in all respects. Our own B. palmatum, we find, revolves in 
the same way, in about four hours, the temperature being 75° 
Fahr. 
The power of revolving depends, of course, upon the general 
health and vigor of the plant, and upon the age of the 
shoot, is retarded by lowering the temperature, is interrupted 
by any considerable disturbance, such as exposure to cold or 
to much jarring ; carrying the plant from one place to another, 
or cutting off a shoot and placing it in water, stops the movement 
for a time, just as it does the more vivid automatic 
movement of Desmodium gyrans. But each internode is so 
independent that cutting off an upper one does not affect the 
revolutions of the one beneath. Twining stems are far from 
being insensible to the action of light (as Mold supposed), 
the half-revolution toward the light being not uncommonly 
twice faster than that from it ; but as the rate of revolution 
by day and by night is nearly the same, the one half of the 
circuit is accelerated just as much as the other is retarded. 
This influence of the light is quite remarkable when we consider 
the slenderness of most revolving internodes, the small 
surfaces they expose, and that their leaves are little developed. 
The design, as we must term it, of this revolving of the end 
of twining stems is obvious, and usually effectual. Such 
stems, even when no supporting object is within their reach, 
will reach each other, and by twining together make a mutual 
support, from which, as they lengthen, they may reach yet 
farther. The connection of the revolving with twining is 
obvious, though the latter is not a necessary consequence ; for 
many stems revolve which do not twine, but climb in some 
other way. 
" When at last the [revolving] shoot meets with a support, 
the motion at the point of contact is necessarily arrested, but 
the free projecting part goes on revolving. Almost immediately 
another and upper point of the shoot is brought into 
contact with the support and is arrested ; and so onward to the 
extremity of the shoot ; and thus it winds round its support. 
When the shoot follows the sun in its revolving course, it 
winds itself round the support from right to left, the support 
being supposed to stand in front of the beholder ; when the 
shoot revolves in an opposite direction, the line of winding is 
reversed. As each internode loses from age its power of 
revolving, it loses its power of spirally twining round a support. 
If a man swings a rope round his head, and the end 
hits a stick, it will coil round the stick according to the direction 
of the swinging rope ; so it is with twining plants, the 
continued contraction or turgescence of the cells alon<? the 
free part of the shoot replacing the momentum of each atom 
of the free end of the rope. 
" All the authors, except Von Mohl, who have discussed the 
spiral twining of plants maintain that such plants have a natural 
tendency to grow spirally. Mohl believes (S. 112) that 
twining stems have a dull kind of irritability, so that they 
bend toward any object which they touch. Even before 
reading Mohl's interesting treatise, this view seemed to me 
so probable that I tested it in every way that I could, but 
always with negative results. I rubbed many shoots much 
harder than is necessary to excite movement in any tendril or 
in any foot-stalk of a leaf-climber, but without result. I then 
tied a very light forked twig to a shoot of a Hop, a Ceropegia, 
Sphaerostema, and Adhatoda, so that the fork pressed on one 
side alone of the shoot and revolved with it; I purposely 
selected some very slow revolvers, as it seemed most likely 
that these would profit from possessing irritability ; but in no 
case was any effect produced. Moreover, when a shoot winds 
round a support, the movement is always slower, as we shall 
immediately see, than whilst it revolves freely and touches 
nothing. Hence I conclude that twining stems are not irritable 
; and indeed it is not probable that it should be so, as 
nature always economizes her means, and irritability would be 
superfluous. Nevertheless I do not wish to assert that they 
are never irritable ; for the growing axis of the leaf-climbing, 
but not spirally twining, Bophospermum scandens is, as we 
shall hereafter see, certainly irritable ; but this case gives me 
confidence that ordinary twiners do not possess this quality, 
for directly after putting a stick to the Lophospermum, I saw 
that it behaved differently from any true twiner or any other 
leaf -climber. 
" The belief that twiners have a natural tendency to grow 
spirally probably arose from their assuming this form when 
wound round a support, and from the extremity, even whilst 
remaining free, sometimes assuming this same form. The free 
internodes of vigorously growing plants, when they cease to 
revolve, become straight, and show no tendency to be spiral ; 
but when any shoot has nearly ceased to grow, or when the 
plant is unhealthy, the extremity does occasionally become 
spiral. I have seen this in a remarkable degree with the ends 
of the shoots of the Stauntonia and of the allied Akebia, 
which became closely wound up spirally, just like a tendril, 
especially after the small, ill-formed leaves had perished. The 
explanation of this fact is, I believe, that the lower parts of 
such terminal internodes very gradually and successively lose 
their power of movement, whilst the portions just above move 
onward, and in their turn become motionless ; and this ends in 
forming an irregular spire. 
" When a revolving shoot strikes a stick, it winds round it 
rather more slowly than it revolves. For instance, a shoot of 
the Ceropegia took 9 hours and 30 minutes to make one complete 
spire round a stick, whilst it revolved in 6 hours ; Anstolochia 
gigas revolved in about 5 hours, but took 9 hours and 
15 minutes to complete its spire. This, I presume, is due to 
the continued disturbance of the moving force by its arrestment 
at each successive point ; we shall hereafter see that even 
shaking a plant retards the revolving movement. The terminal 
internodes of a long, much-inclined, revolving shoot of the 
Ceropegia, after they had wound round a stick, always slipped 
up it, so as to render the spire more open than it was at first ; 
and this was evidently due to the force which caused the revolu- 
tions being now almost freed from the constraint of gravity, 
and allowed to act freely. With the Wistaria, on the other 
hand, a long, horizontal shoot wound itself at first, in a very 
close spire, which remained unchanged ; but subsequently, as 
the shoot grew, it made a much more open spire. With all 
the many plants which were allowed freely to ascend a support, 
the terminal internodes made at first a close spire ; and 
this, during windy weather, well served to keep the shoots in 
contact with their support ; but as the penultimate internodes 
grew in length, they pushed themselves up for a considerable 
space (ascertained by colored marks on the shoot and on the 
support) round the stick, and the spire became more open. 
" If a stick which has arrested a revolving shoot, but has 
not as yet been wound round, be suddenly taken away, the 
shoot generally springs forward, showing that it has continued 
to press against the stick. If the stick, shortly after having 
been wound round, be withdrawn, the shoot retains for a time 
its spiral form, then straightens itself, and again commences 
to revolve. The long, much-inclined shoot of the Ceropegia 
previously alluded to offered some curious peculiarities. The 
lower and older internodes, which continued to revolve, had 
become so stiff that they were incapable, on repeated trials, of 
twining round a thin stick, showing that the power of movement 
was retained after flexibility had been lost. I then 
moved the stick to a greater distance, so that it was struck by 
a point 2| inches from the extremity of the penultimate internode 
; and it was then neatly wound round by this part and 
by the ultimate internode. After leaving the spirally wound 
shoot for eleven hours, I quietly withdrew the stick, and in 
the course of the day the curled part straightened itself and 
re-commenced revolving ; but the lower and not curled portion 
of the penultimate internode did not move, a sort of hinge 
separating the moving and the motionless part of the same 
internode. After a few days, however, I found that the 
lower part of this internode had likewise recovered its revolving 
power. These several facts show, that, in the arrested 
portion of a revolving shoot, the power of movement is not 
immediately lost, and that when temporarily lost it can be re- 
. 
covered. When a shoot has remained for a considerable time 
wound round its support, it permanently retains its spiral 
form even when the support is removed. 
" When a stick was placed so as to arrest the lower and rigid 
internodes of the Ceropegia at the distance at first of 15 and 
then of 21 inches from the centre of revolution, the shoot slowly 
and gradually slid up the stick, so as to become more and more 
highly inclined ; and then, after an interval sufficient to have 
allowed of a semi-revolution, it suddenly bounded from the 
stick and fell over to the opposite side, to its ordinary slight 
inclination. It now recommenced revolving in its usual 
course, so that after a semi-revolution it again came into contact 
with the stick, again slid up it, and again bounded from 
it. This movement of the shoot had a very odd appearance, 
as if it were disgusted with its failure but resolved to try 
again. We shall, I think, understand this movement by considering 
the former illustration of the sapling, in which the 
contracting surface was supposed to creep from the southern, 
by the eastern, to the northern, and thence back again by the 
western side to the southern face, successively bowing the sapling 
in all directions. Now with the Ceropegia, the stick 
being placed a very little to the east of due south of the plant, 
the eastern contraction could produce no effect beyond pressing 
the rigid internode against the stick ; but as soon as the contraction 
of the northern face began, it would slowly drag the 
shoot up the stick ; and then, as soon as the western contraction 
had well begun, the shoot would be drawn from the stick, 
and its weight coinciding with the northwestern contraction, 
would cause it suddenly to fall to the opposite side with its 
proper slightly inclined positions ; and the ordinary revolving 
movement would go on. I have described this case because it 
first made me understand the order in which the contracting 
or turgescent cells of revolving shoots must act. 
" The view just given further explains, as I believe, a fact 
observed by Von Mohl (S. 135), namely, that a revolving 
shoot, though it will twine round an object as thin as a thread, 
cannot do so round a thick support. I placed some long 
revolving shoots of a Wistaria close to a post between 5 and 
6 inches in diameter, but they could not, though aided by me 
in many ways, wind round it. This apparently is owing to 
the flexure of the shoot, when winding round an object so 
gently curved as this post, not being sufficient to hold the 
shoot to its place when the contracting force creeps round to 
the opposite surface of the shoot ; so that it is at each revolution 
withdrawn from its support." — (pp. 9-13, passim.) 
The successive shifting of the contracting side of the shoot, 
which explains the revolution or bowing in turn in every direction, 
no less explains the twining round a proper support, 
leaving however some idiosyncrasies unexplained. Some tendrils 
and some petioles of leaf-climbing plants equally possess 
this revolving power ; but their usefulness depends mainly 
upon additional and more special endowments, — mainly upon 
the power of directly responding by curvature to the contact, 
more or less prolonged, of an extraneous body. 
Of Leaf-climbers, no instance is more familiar than that of 
Clematis or Virgin's Bower. Little more was known of them 
than that they climbed by curling their petioles (common or 
partial) around neighboring objects. Mr. Darwin made observations 
upon eight species of Clematis, seven of Tropaeolum, 
the common species of Maurandia, Lophospermum, Fumaria, 
etc., as also upon Gloriosa and Flagellaria, which climb by a 
tendril-like production of the tip of the leaf. From the summary 
it appears that plants which belong to eight families are 
known to have clasping petioles, and those of four families 
climb by the tips of their leaves. In almost all of them the 
young internodes revolve, in some of them as extensively as 
in twining plants, — the movement being plainly serviceable 
in bringing the petioles or the tips of the leaves into contact 
with surrounding objects. Those whose shoots revolve most 
freely are also capable of twining spirally around a support ; 
but when the stem twines (as in Clematis Sieboldii and C. 
calycina, but not in C. Viticellci), it has the peculiarity of winding 
first in one direction for two or three turns, and then in the 
opposite direction. The petioles are principally efficient in these 
plants, and that by means of an endowment which is not shown 
to belong to twining stems, with one or two exceptions. That 
is, the petioles or their divisions are sensitive to the contact of 
an extraneous body, contracting on the side touched so as to 
curve or coil around it. That the footstalk is directly sensitive 
to the touch, just as tendrils are, Mr. Darwin proved by 
lightly rubbing them with a twig for a few times, when in the 
course of some hours it bends to the rubbed side, afterwards 
becoming straight again ; or by leaving the body in contact it 
is permanently clasped by the footstalk. So sensitive are some 
footstalks that " a loop of thread weighing a quarter of a grain 
caused them to bend ; a loop weighing one-eighth of a grain 
sometimes acted, and sometimes not." In one instance, in 
Clematis Flammula, even the sixteenth part of a grain caused 
a petiole to bend through nearly 90 degrees. With rare 
exceptions only the young petioles are sensitive. Take the 
cultivated Clematis Viticella for an illustration of the mode in 
which the leaves do the work of climbing. 
"The leaves are of large size. There are three pairs of 
lateral leaflets and a terminal one, all borne by rather long 
petioles. The main petiole bends a little, angularly, downward 
at each point where a pair of leaflets arises, and the 
petiole of the terminal leaflet is bent downward at right angles ; 
hence the whole petiole, with its rectangularly bent extremity, 
acts as a hook. This, with the lateral petioles directed a little 
upward, forms an excellent grappling apparatus by which the 
leaves readily become entangled with surrounding objects. If 
they catch nothing, the whole petiole ultimately grows straight. 
Both the medial and lateral petioles are sensitive ; and the 
three branches, into which the basi-lateral petioles are generally 
subdivided, likewise are sensitive. The basal portion of 
the main petiole, between the stem and the first pair of leaflets, 
is less sensitive than the remainder, but it will clasp a 
stick when in contact. On the other hand, the inferior surface 
of the rectangularly bent terminal portion (carrying the 
terminal leaflet), which forms the inner side of the end of the 
book, is the most sensitive part ; and this portion is manifestly 
best adapted to catch distant supports. To show the difference 
in sensibility, I gently placed loops of string of the same 
Weight (in one instance weighing .82 of a grain) on the sev- <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:50:19 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

angles ; and the curvature was always toward the rubbed 
side." 
Here, then, is one case in which the sensibility of a stem is 
manifest, and is turned to useful account. The peduncles of 
the allied Maurandia semperflorens are also sensitive and 
flexuous, although Mr. Darwin insists that they are useless 
for climbing That some stems should be sensitive might 
have been expected; for tendrils of axial nature {e- qr.oi 
Passiflora gracilis) are not less sensitive than those of foliar 
nature, as of Legumirmsm, Cucurbitacem, and CoW And 
if twining stems in general are not endowed with a dull 
kind of irritability," as Mohl conjectured, it may well be 
because the equally wonderful automatic revolving movement 
leaves no need for it. In general, the most striking cases of 
automatic movement belong to leaves or their homologues. 
The distinction can be only somewhat arbitrarily drawn 
between' Leaf-climbers — especially those with small or undeveloped 
leaflets, or where the tip of the leaf forms a hook 
or tendril-like projection — and Tendril-climbers. The tendril, 
however, whether answering to leaf or stem, is the more 
specialized organ, adapted only for climbing, and endowed in 
different plants with very various and some highly remarkable 
powers. To this subject Mr. Darwin has devoted more 
than half of his essay. An analysis of it must be deferred, 
for want of space. 
Near the close of the essay, under Hook-climbers, Mr. 
Darwin remarks that : — 
" Even some of the climbing Eoses will ascend the walls of 
a tall house, if covered with a trellis ; how this is effected I 
know not; for the young shoots of one such Bose, when 
placed in a pot in a window, bent irregularly toward the light 
during the day and from it during the night, lib.; any other 
plant ; so that it is not easy to understand how the shoots can 
get under a trellis close to a wall." 
Now we have had occasion to observe that the strong summer-shoots 
of the Michigan Bose {Rosa sotigera, Mx., R. rubifolia, 
E. Br.), trained on a latticed wall, are strongly disposed 
to push into dark crevices and away from the light ; they 
would, many of them, pretty surely place themselves under 
the trellis, and the lateral shoots of the next spring would 
emerge as they seek the light. We suspect this is also true 
of the Sweet Brier. 
Twiners and Leaf-climbers having been considered, Tendril-bearers, 
which are the highest style of climbing plants, 
next demand our attention. But our analysis of this important 
part of Mr. Darwin's treatise must be disproportionably 
brief. 
There are two kinds of movement exhibited by plants, 
which should be distinguished. Ist, Automatic, usually continued 
movements, not set in action by extraneous invitation. 
The gyratory movement of the small leaflets of SDesmodixtm 
gyrans is an exalted instance of this. 2d, Movements in consequence 
of the contact or action of an extraneous body, — of 
which those of the leaves of the Sensitive Blant may be taken 
as the type. Twining stems, as has been seen, strikingly exhibit 
the first, and their coiling around a support is a consequence 
of it. 
Tendrils for the most part execute both kinds of movement. 
They revolve, with some exceptions, like twining 
stems ; and they are all more or less sensitive to contact, — 
usually more so than the petioles of leaf -climbers, — bending 
toward the impinging body so as to hook or clasp around it, 
if the size will allow. Different tendrils act differently in 
some respects, some revolving freely, and sweeping wide 
circuits, some less evidently, and some, like those of the Virginia 
Creeper, do not revolve at all, but turn from the light 
to the dark. But whether the tendril is the homologue of 
a leaf, or of a stem (or of a peduncle, which is the same 
thing), appears to make no difference in its action. On the 
other hand their diversity of gifts in one and the same family, 
or even in species of the same genus, is very remarkable, 
as may be seen especially in the Bignonia Family, the 
Grape Family, etc. So, also, the tendrils are commonly aided 
in their endeavors by the revolving of the internodes of the 
stem, but sometimes not, even in plants of the same genus 
or family. Mr. Darwin takes up tendril-bearing plants by 
natural families, beginning with Bignoniacem, which order 
contains tendril-bearers, leaf-climbers, twiners, root-climbers, 
and various combinations of these diverse modes. We, however 
will first consider the tendrils of the Gourd, and Passion-flower 
families, regarding them as typical and simple 
representatives of tendril-climbers. 
Passiflora gracilis, a delicate annual species, lately introduced 
into the gardens, of the easiest cultivation, one 
which differs from most of its relatives in the young internodes 
having the power of revolving , is said by Mr. Darwin 
to exceed all other climbing plants in the rapidity of 
its movements, and all tendril-bearers in the sensitiveness of 
its tendrils. In the latter respect it decidedly surpasses our 
Echinocystis ; but it is nearly if not quite equalled by Sicyos, 
in which the coiling upon contact was first noticed as a visible 
movement. The revolving internodes, when in the best 
condition, make almost hourly revolutions, and the long, delicate, 
straight tendrils revolve nearly in the same manner and 
at the same rate. The sensitiveness of the tendril, when fullgrown, 
is correspondingly great, a single light touch on the 
concave surface of the tip causing a considerable curvature. 
" A loop of soft thread weighing of a grain, placed most 
gently on the tip, thrice plainly caused it to curve, as twice 
did a bent bit of thin platinum wire weighing -g^th of a grain ; 
but this latter weight, when left suspended, did not suffice to 
cause permanent curvature." After touch with the twig, the 
tip begins to bend in from 25 to 39 seconds.^ After coiling 
into an open helix upon transient irritation, they soon 
straighten again, recovering their sensibility ; but if left in 
contact, the action continues. We found it a pretty experiment, 
last summer, during the warmest days, to bring the upper 
Part of an outstretched tendril by its inner or concave side 
against a twig or cord, and to see how promptly it would clasp 
it, revolving its free apex round and round it. A curious discrimination 
in the sensibility of such tendrils is mentioned 
by Mr. Darwin, as follows : — 
" I repeated the experiment made on the Echinocystis, and 
placed several plants of this Passiflora so close together that 
the tendrils were repeatedly dragged over each other ; but no 
curvature ensued. I likewise repeatedly flirted small drops 
of water from a brush on many tendrils, and syringed others 
so violently that the whole tendril was dashed about, but they 
never became curved. The impact from the drops of water 
on my hand was felt far more plainly than that from the 
loops of thread (weighing g^d of a grain) when allowed to 
fall upon it, and these loops, which caused the tendrils to become 
curved, had been placed most gently on them. Hence 
it is clear, either that the tendrils are habituated to the touch 
of other tendrils and to that of drops of rain, or that they are 
sensitive only to prolonged though excessively slight pressure. 
To show the difference of the kind of sensitiveness in different 
plants, and likewise to show the force of the syringe used, I 
may add that the lightest jet from it instantly caused the 
leaves of the Mimosa to close ; whereas the loop of thread 
weighing -gigd of a grain, when rolled into a ball and gently 
placed in the glands at the base of the leaflets of the Mimosa, 
caused no action." — (p. 90.) 
Of Cucurbitaceous tendrils, the most active, after those of 
Sicyos (which Mr. Darwin has not observed), are those of 
Echinocystis lobata. The internodes and tendrils revolve in 
about an hour and three quarters, the former sweeping a circle 
or ellipse of two or three inches in diameter, the latter often 
one of 15 or 16 inches in diameter. Perhaps the most remarkable 
appearance of discrimination in tendrils is that 
which Mr. Darwin first noticed in this plant, but which may 
be seen in others, — and which he thus describes : — 
" I repeatedly saw that the revolving tendril, though inclined 
during the greater part of its course at an angle of 
about 45° (in one case of only 37°) above the horizon, in one 
part of its course stiffened and straightened itself from tip to 
base, and became nearly or quite vertical. . . . The tendril 
forms a very acute angle with the extremity of the shoot, 
which projects above the point where the tendril arises ; and 
the stiffening always occurred as the tendril approached and 
had to pass, in its revolving course, the point of difficulty, — 
that is, the projecting extremity of the shoot. Unless the ten- 
dril had the power of thus acting, it would strike against the 
extremity of the shoot, and be arrested by it. As soon as all 
these branches of the tendrils begin to stiffen themselves in 
this remarkable manner, as if by a process of tumescence, and 
to rise from an inclined into a vertical position, the revolving 
movement becomes more rapid ; and as soon as the tendril 
has succeeded in passing the extremity of the shoot, its revolving 
motion, coinciding with that from gravity, often 
causes it to fall into its previous inclined position so quickly, 
that the end of the tendril could distinctly be seen travelling 
like the minute-hand of a gigantic clock." — (p. 75.) 
Cucurbitaceous tendrils are mostly compound, m this case 
three-forked. When one of the lateral branches has firmly 
clasped any object, the middle branch continues to revolve. 
If a full-grown tendril fails to reach and lay hold of any 
object, it soon ceases to revolve, bends downwards, and cods 
up spirally from the apex. Indeed it often coils while still 
outstretched and revolving, the tendency to shorten (as we 
presume) on the inner side from the tip downward, which is 
usually brought into action by contact with an extraneous 
body, at length operating spontaneously. Uncaught tendrils 
when they thus coil up throw themselves of course into a simple 
helix or spire. One end being free, this is the simple and 
necessary consequence of the relative shortening of the concave 
side, sufficiently continued. 
In a caught tendril, the relative shortening of one side, 
(through which the tip hooks round and fixes itself to the supporting 
object), being propagated downwards, the whole now 
throws itself into a spiral form, — with more or less promptitude 
according to the species, — thus pulling the free portion 
of the tendril-bearing shoot nearer to the support, and within 
easier reach of the next tendril above. Both ends of the tendril 
being fixed, and the winding round an axis (real or imaginary) 
necessarily involving or being a twist, it is certain that 
the caught tendril cannot now coil into a simple spiral, but 
that the spire will at least be double, a coil near one end of 
the tendril in one direction requiring the other to twist in the 
opposite direction, unless indeed it undergoes torsion. So, as 
is familiarly known, there is at least one neutral point in 
a caught and coiled -up tendril, usually in the middle, the 
turns on one side of it running from right to left, on the other 
side from left to right. That the coils, whether simple or 
double and reversed (as the case may be), are not determined 
by any peculiarity in the tendril, but merely by the relative 
shortening of one side, may be readily shown by a thread cut 
from a piece of india-rubber, of unequal tension of the two 
sides ; this, when stretched and allowed to shorten while the 
two ends are held fast in the same plane, forms at once a pair 
of reverse coils, or three or four such coils, just as caught 
tendrils do. 
Mr. Darwin explains the point by analogous practical illustrations. 
He shows, moreover, that an important service rendered 
by the coiling or spiral contraction " is that the tendrils 
are thus made highly elastic." In the Virginia Creeper, where 
the ends of the compound tendrils are peculiarly attached, 
" the strain is thus equally distributed to the several attached 
branches of a branched tendril ; and this must render the 
whole tendril far stronger, as branch after branch cannot separately 
break. It is this elasticity which saves both simple 
and branched tendrils from being torn away during stormy 
weather. I have more than once gone on purpose, during 
a gale, to watch a Bryony growing in an exposed hedge, with 
its tendrils attached to the surrounding bushes ; and as the 
thick or thin branches were tossed to and fro by the wind, the 
attached tendrils, had they not been excessively elastic, would 
have been instantly torn off and the plant thrown prostrate. 
But as it was, the Bryony safely rode out the gale, like a ship 
with two anchors down and a long range of cable ahead, to 
serve as a spring as she surges to the storm." 
Moreover, while unattached tendrils soon shrink up or 
wither and fall off, as we observe in the Grapevine, Virginia 
Creeper, etc., these same plants show how an attached tendril 
thickens and hardens, gaining wonderfully in strength and 
durability. In a Virginia Creeper, " one single lateral branchlet 
of a (dead) tendril, estimated to be at least ten years old, 
was still elastic and supported a weight of exactly two pounds. 
This tendril had five disk-bearing branches, of equal thickness 
and apparently equal strength ; so that this one tendril, after 
havino- been exposed during ten years to the weather, would 
have resisted a strain of ten pounds." 
Our space will not allow even an abstract of Darwin's 
account of the admirable adaptations and curious behavior of 
various tendrils, even of some very common plants ; as for 
instance of the familiar Cobma scandens, in which (the stem 
and the petioles being motionless) the great compound tendril 
borne at the summit of the leaf executes large circular sweeps 
with remarkable rapidity, carrying round an elaborate flexible 
grapnel, consisting of its five subdivisions, from 50 to 100 
in number, which are very sensitive even to a slight touch, 
bending in a few minutes toward the touched side, so that 
they clasp twigs very promptly, and all tipped with minute, 
double or sometimes single, sharp hooks, which catch in little 
inequalities, and may prevent the tendril branchlets from 
being dragged away by the rapid revolving movement before 
their irritability has time to act, while the still free ones proceed 
to arrange themselves, by various queer and complicated 
movements, so as to secure the most advantageous hold ; then 
contracting spirally so as to bring other portions up within 
reach of the support, until all are inextricably knotted and 
fastened, and finally growing stouter, rigid and strong, binding 
the plant firmly to its support. 
We cannot omit all mention of Bignonia capreolata, a not 
uncommon climber of our Southern States, of which we especially 
wish to obtain fresh seeds or young plants, that we may 
ourselves observe the remarkable behavior of its tendrils which 
Mr. Darwin describes. These are said to turn from the light, 
as in many other cases ; they will clasp smooth sticks, but soon 
lose their hold and straighten themselves again. A rough, 
fissured, or porous surface alone satisfies them ; their young 
tips seek and crawl into dark holes and crevices, in the manner 
of roots ; then they develop their hooked extremity, and, 
especially when they meet with any fibrous matter, the hook 
swells into irregular balls of cellular tissue, which first adhere 
to the fibres by a viscid cement, and then grow so as to de- 
velop them. This tendril can do nothing with a smooth post, 
fails to attach itself to a brick wall, but is well adapted to 
climb trees with rough and mossy bark. 
The Virginia Creeper also turns its tendrils from the light, 
and, although they will occasionally clasp a slender support, 
in the manner of its relative the Grapevine, they uniformly 
seek dark crevices, or especially broad flat surfaces, as a wall, 
a rock, or the trunk of a tree. Having brought their curved 
tips into contact with such a surface, these swell and form, in 
the course of a few days, the well-known disks or cushions by 
which they firmly adhere. Here is a tendril-climber which 
emulates a root-climber, such as the Ivy, in the facility with 
which it ascends smooth trunks, rocks, or walls. 
A very short chapter is devoted to Hook-climbers and Bootclimbers. 
The stems of the latter are said to "have usually 
no power of movement, not even from the light to the dark. 
But Iloya carnosa, which twines, also climbs by rootlets 
spreading over the face of a damp wall ; and Tecoma radicans 
(our Trumpet Creeper) exhibits in its young shoots 
some vestiges of the revolving power with which its twining 
relatives are endowed." 
In a dozen pages of Concluding Remarks, Mr. Darwin 
gives much interesting matter in the way of deduction and 
speculation, which it would be difficult to condense into an 
abstract. 
Blants become climbers, he remarks, in order to reach the 
light, and expose a large surface of leaves to its action and 
that of the free air. Their advantage is, that they do this 
with wonderfully little expenditure of organized matter in 
comparison with trees, which have to support a heavy load 
of branches by a massive trunk. Of the different sorts of 
climbers hook-climbers are the least efficient, at least in temperate 
countries, as they climb only in the midst of an entangled 
mass of vegetation. Next root-climbers, which are 
admirably adapted to ascend naked faces of rock ; but when 
they climb trees they must keep much in the shade, and follow 
the trunk ; for their rootlets can adhere only by longcontinued 
and close contact with a steady surface. Thirdly, 
spiral twiners, with leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers, which 
agree in their power of spontaneously revolving and of grasping 
objects which they reach, are the most numerous in kinds, 
and most perfect in mechanism ; they can easily pass from 
branch to branch, and securely ramble over a wide and sunlit 
surface. 
After adducing some considerations in support of his 
opinion that both leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers " were 
primordially twiners, that is, are the descendants of plants 
having this power and habit," Mr. Darwin asks : " Why 
have nearly all the plants in so many aboriginally twining 
groups been converted into leaf-climbers or tendril-bearers ? 
Of what advantage could this have been to them ? Why did 
they not remain simple twiners ? We can see several reasons. 
It might be an advantage to a plant to acquire a 
thicker stem, with short internodes, bearing many or large 
leaves ; and such stems as are ill fitted for twining. Any 
one who will look during windy weather at twining plants 
will see that they are easily blown from their support ; not 
so with tendril-bearers or leaf-climbers, for they quickly and 
firmly grasp their support by a much more efficient kind of 
movement. In those plants which still twine, but at the same 
time possess tendrils or sensitive petioles, as some species of 
Bignonia, Clematis, and Tropaeolum, we can readily observe 
how incomparably more securely they grasp an upright stick 
than do simple twiners. From possessing the power of movement 
on contact, a tendril can be made very long and thin ; so 
that little organic matter is expended in their development, 
and yet a wide circle is swept. Tendril-bearers can, from 
their first growth, ascend along the outer branches of any 
neighboring bush, and thus always keep in the full light ; 
twiners, on the contrary, are best fitted to ascend bare stems, 
and generally have to start in the shade. . . . 
" The object of all climbing plants is to reach the light and 
free air with as little expenditure of organic matter as possible 
; now, with spirally-ascending plants the stem is much 
longer than is absolutely necessary ; for instance, I measured 
the stem of a Kidney-bean which had ascended exactly two 
feet in height, and it was three feet in length. The stem of a 
Bea, ascending by its tendrils would, on the other hand, have 
been but little longer than the height gained. That this saving 
of stem is really an advamtage to climbing plants I infer 
from observing that those that still twine, but are aided by 
clasping petioles or tendrils, generally make more open spires 
than those made by simple twiners." — (p. 110.) 
The gradations between one organ and another, and their 
special endowments, and the great diversity of their movements, 
are illustrated at length ; and the very large number 
of natural families which exhibit these endowments, in some 
of their members, is indicated ; and it is noted that two or 
three genera alone have those powers in some of the largest 
and best defined natural orders, such as Compositm, Rubiacem, 
Tiliacem, Ferns, etc. ; from which he infers " that 
the capacity for acquiring the revolving power, on which 
most climbers depend, is inherent, though undeveloped, in 
almost every plant in the vegetable kingdom " (p. 117). 
Mr. Darwin somewhere throws out the remark that the 
larger number, and the most perfectly organized climbing 
plants, as of the scandent animals, belong to one country, 
tropical America. 
In abruptly closing these extracts and brief commentaries, 
we would add, that the Linnaean Society has issued a separate 
reprint of this charming treatise, thus opening to it a 
wider circle of readers. 
WATSON'S BOTANY OF THE 40TH PARALLEL. 
We propose to notice this volume 1 particularly : indeed it 
well deserves a more thorough examination and more extended 
review than our time and space will now allow us to 
devote to it. It is published "by order of the Secretary of 
War, under the authority of Congress," as one of the Engi- 
1 United States Geological Survey of the Ifilh Parallel. V. Botany. By 
Sereno Watson. Washington, 1871. (American Journal of Science and 
Arts, 3 ser,, iii. pp. 62 and 148.) 
neer Corps series, has been carefully edited and beautifully 
printed, so that the volume is every way an attractive one. 
Errors of the press are to be found, but they are apparently 
few, and the whole typography is remarkably excellent for the 
Government Printing Office. Our comparison is naturally 
with corresponding volumes of the Pacific Railroad Survey, 
and of the Mexican Boundary Survey, upon which the present 
volume is a notable improvement. The forty plates, filled 
with well chosen subjects, if not of the very highest style, 
are so well done and of such excellent promise that the name 
of the draughtsman (who is new to this class of work, we 
believe), Mr. J. H. Emerton, of Salem, Massachusetts, should 
properly have been appended to them. 
The General Eeport, of 53 pages, forms a separately 
paged introduction to the " Catalogue," as it is termed with 
excessive modesty, i. e., the systematic account of the plants 
collected, which makes up the principal bulk of the volume. 
This General Eeport will naturally be most interesting to 
general readers and naturalists, but no less so to special botanists. 
It is thoroughly readable matter, and we expect to 
see it reproduced in the scientific journals. Four or five 
pages sketch the geographical features of the region, tersely 
and clearly. But, when a stream of water is said to " become 
demoralized with alkali and is lost," we could wish that this 
popularized use of the word were buried with it. The meteorological 
notes, with tabulated observations by thermometer, 
evaporator, etc., are equally interesting, displaying the dryness 
of the Great Basin, its cold winters and hot summers. 
The notes on the general character of the vegetation picture 
to us the botanical aspect of the region, the relative prevalence 
of the predominant species, the slow and cross-grained 
growth of what timber there is in the canons, etc. A dead 
branch, apparently of Pinus monophylla, 8 inches in diameter, 
had. the fibres so twisted that in 7 feet they made four 
complete circuits. A saw-mill in Buby Valley offered the 
opportunity of ascertaining the age and dimensions of several 
specimens of Pinus flexilis from the upper canons of the 
Humboldt Mountains; sections from 22 to 30 inches in 
diameter showed from 400 to 486 annual rings. The " everlasting 
sage-bush," Artemisia tridentata, displayed 65 rings 
on a section 8 inches in diameter, 37 upon 4 inches, etc. A 
Juniperus occidental-is, 12 inches in diameter, showed 250 
rings. Cercocarpus ledifolius, it appears, may form a trunk 
of 2 feet in diameter, with 160 rings. The alkaline species, 
aquatic and meadow species, those of the drier valleys and 
foot-hills, the mountain species, etc., are separately enumerated; 
the introduced species, about 30 in number, are recorded, 
and finally the number of indigenous genera and 
species is given under their orders, and their distribution in 
the basin or over the borders on either side is tabulated. Of 
the 1141 species of the basin and of the Wahsatch and 
Uintas, 60 per cent, appear to inhabit also the Pacific slope, 
about 60 per cent, are not found east of the Eocky Mountains, 
15 per cent, only approach the Mississippi or the Saskatchewan, 
25 per cent, approach the Atlantic, 17 per cent, 
are Mexican or southern, and nearly 15 per cent, are Arctic. 
A few pages at the close are devoted to the consideration of 
the agricultural resources of the basin, the limit to which is 
fixed by the deficiency of water. " The most fertile localities 
lie at the base of the Sierras ; but, as a rule, there is an apparent 
absence everywhere of a true soil or mould resulting from 
the decomposition of vegetable matter." A moderate amount 
of alkali in the soil appears not to be detrimental to culture. 
The soil which produces "sage bush" seems to be always cultivable 
when it can be irrigated. With the present supply of 
water, most economically used, it is thought that only one 
thousand out of 34,000 square miles of northern Nevada could 
be brought under cultivation; of the southerly portion and 
of western Utah much less. Eastern Utah, with larger and 
more constant supplies of water from the Wahsatch and the 
Uinta Mountains, is much more favorably situated. The 
absence of graminivorous animals, excepting rabbits in the 
valleys and rarely a few mountain sheep or antelopes in the 
higher ranges, shows that the country is ill adapted for grazing. 
Eurotia lanata and a few other Chenopodiaceous plants 
are eaten by sheep as a substitute for grass. 
Mr. Watson raises the question whether — considering the 
amount of low shrubby and perennial vegetation which inhabits 
the plains and thrives without irrigation — these plants themselves, 
or some more serviceable substitutes equally adapted to 
the climatic conditions, may not be turned to some profitable 
account under the necessities of a future population ; and 
whether, in time to come, some forms of orchard, vineyard, or 
tree-culture may not possibly be made to thrive in that region. 
He finds that the present plants on the whole are not lacking 
in expansion of foliage or succulence, at least that the more 
prevalent plants had an average of from 55 to 80 per cent, 
of foliage or working surface ; and a series of rough but seemingly 
well-devised experiments demonstrated that they give 
off by evaporation daily an amount equal to three eighths of 
the weight of their available material. Dry as the soil appears 
to be, it is this, and not the atmosphere, that must furnish the 
supply to make good this loss. Yet water is rarely to be had 
under a depth of 100 to 300 feet, often not even at that depth. 
The porous soil must allow of the free upward diffusion of 
moisture, also of deep penetration of the roots from above. 
An excellent map is given, exhibiting the district from 
above the 42d parallel to below the 39th, on which the routes 
of the three several years are traced in colored lines, and the 
mountain ranges with the general configuration of the surface 
represented. We will endeavor hereafter to review the systematic 
part of this work. 
(Second Notice.) — Under the modest name of a catalogue 
of the known plants of Nevada and Utah, Mr. Watson has 
given us a treatise, not to say a Flora, of a wide stretch of 
country between the Sierra Nevada and the Eocky Mountains, 
which is invaluable to the botanist studying the plants of that 
region in herbaria, and still more to explorers on the ground, 
—of which we hope there may be many. For not only are 
new or revised species described, but all species not contained 
in the common eastern manuals, etc., which every collector is 
supposed to possess ; the characters of western genera are 
appended in foot-notes, and synopses of recently elaborated 
genera — some of them reprints or translations of scattered 
papers with corrections or additions, others original revisions 
by the editor himself — are added in an appendix, so as to 
afford every possible help to the student or collector who has 
not access to a full botanical library, and indeed most acceptable 
facilities to those few who have. 
After thus calling attention to a volume of so much importance, 
we propose to restrict our comments to sundry 
details of criticism, or points of information, where opportunity 
occurs. 
Under Tfudictrum Fendleri some synonyms are adduced 
which are not all certain ; as there is another Oregon species 
which has been confounded with T. dioicum, but is distinct 
from both in the fruit, which was sparingly collected in the 
British Boundary expedition, and lately by Mr. Hall. 
Ranunculus ' alismmfolius var. montanus is essentially equivalent 
to the variety alismellus Gray ; although the speci- , 
mens from the " head of Provo Biver in the Uintas " are a 
stouter and larger-flowered form, identical with Barry's No. 
79, which we had wrongly named when distributed, and which 
may be rightly characterized as merely a dwarf mountain state 
of Geyer's R. alismmfolius. We may now add that there is 
a much older name for this species, especially for this mountain 
form of it, namely, R. Pseudo-JTir cuius of Schrank, 
1842, a Songarian plant. It may also be noted that, while 
this species in eastern America takes the place of the European 
R. Flammula, both occur on the western side of the 
continent (as also in Siberia), and in forms so much alike 
that only the character of the style and that of the petal and 
its scale (so well indicated by Mr. Watson) will serve to distinguish 
them. Of amply developed R. Flammula —as large 
as any European form — copious specimens have been collected 
in Oregon last year, by Mr. Elihu Hall, and are soon 
to be distributed. 
As to R. fascicularis, there is no clear evidence that this 
species extends to California, Nevada, or even to Oregon. 
The plant referred to and so named in Lyall's collection, 
though not in fruit, is apparently R. orthorhynchus, a plant 
most rare in collections, but now, thanks to E. Hall's codec- 
184 REVIEWS. 
tion of last summer, likely to be supplied to botanists. As 
to Mr. Watson's R. orthorhynchus var. alpinus, that is certainly 
not of this species, but a wholly new one, unless it be the 
rare, and to us obscure, R. pedatifidus of Smith, or at least of 
Hooker. For since Schlechtendal's plant of that name has 
been referred to R. affinis, the Siberian one of Smith may also 
be of that species. 
A yellow-flowered Aquilegia, with flowers rather smaller 
and sometimes much smaller than those of A. Canadensis, and 
with spurs shorter than the widely spreading sepals, after the 
manner of A. formosa, and more or less curved (thus approaching 
the European type), which has been collected by Lyall, 
Bourgeau, and others, is now characterized as a new species, 
under the name of A.flavescens, Watson. It should be noted 
that this has been cultivated in European gardens, from seeds 
collected by Boezl, under the name of A. aurea, but it is 
doubtful if it is yet published under that name. 
The Cruciferm constitute an important order in the interior 
basin and its borders. One of Mr. Watson's most notable 
discoveries is that of Brown's Parrya macrocarpa, hitherto 
found only on the Arctic coast. It was detected on the highest 
peak of the Uintas, at an altitude of 12,000 feet. The 
next point of interest is found in our author's discoveries and 
views of plants of the Streptanthus and Thelypodium type. 
Two or three well-marked new species are introduced, and 
Nuttall's obscure Streptanthus cordatus is confidently identified. 
In the present view this is the only Streptanthus of the 
collection ; Mr. Watson, having ascertained that several species, 
such as S. procerus, the curious S. crassicaulis, and two 
new species, have oblong seeds in a terete elongated pod, 
and cotyledons inclining to be incumbent in the manner of 
Thelypodium, combines them into his new genus, Caulanthus. 
And lodanthus, with a few other species, some of which had 
already been excluded from Streptanthus, are referred, as had 
also been tentatively suggested, to Thelypodium. Which is 
all to be highly approved, except, perhaps, the expediency of 
the new genus, when all could be disposed in the two genera : 
Streptanthus for the species with flat or flatfish pods, flat 
seeds, and truly accumbent cotyledons ; Thelypodium, for 
those with more or less terete pods, narrow seeds, and more 
or less incumbent cotyledons. 
We are bound, moreover, to take steps for the suppression 
of a nominal species which is here introduced in consequence 
of our own short-sightedness. In an evil moment we gave the 
name of Smelowshia f Californica to a plant of Professor 
Brewer's collections, thought to be perennial, with exceedingly 
short few-seeded pods. This Mr. Watson identified with a 
common Sisymbrium of the region, distinguished from S. 
canescens by its seeds, strictly in a single series, and transferring 
the name, calls it S. Californicum. He had overlooked 
an article in this Journal (for September, 1866) upon this 
Sophia group of Sisymbrium, from which it would have been 
seen that the plant in question is Sisymbrium incisum of 
Engelmann, and the later S. longipedicellatum of Fournier, 
besides one or two other names of the same author more or 
less strictly referable to it. 
DECAISNE'S MONOGRAPH OF THE GENUS PYRUS. 
A volume of Decaisne's great work —or rather of one of 
his great works — " Le Jardin Fruitier du Museum, un Iconographie 
de touts les Especes et Varietes d'Arbres Fruitiers 
cul fives dans cet Etablissement," etc. (produced in first-rate 
style by Firmin Didot Freres), devoted to the genus Fyrus, 
is now before us. It is a complete monograph of the species 
of this genus, taken in its restricted sense, illustrated by 
figures of the wild types, and also of the cultivated races of 
those cider-pears known in France under the name of Sauger. 
There is a list of the cider-pears cultivated in the different 
provinces of France, a general alphabetical catalogue of all 
the published varieties of pears, and a table in which the synonyms 
are referred to the names severally adopted. The 
other volumes, and the illustrations of the edible varieties of 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., iv. 489 ; x. 481. 
pears, may have more interest for the horticulturist. But the 
present attracts the special attention of the scientific botanist. 
As stated in the Introduction, Professor Decaisne entered 
upon his great undertaking more than twenty years ago, when, 
in the year 1850, he became the Professor of Culture. He 
cites the instructions under which the separate collection of 
fruit-trees was constituted, and the professor of culture was 
charged with its management, and was directed to bring together 
all the known varieties, with all their names, " afin 
d'etablir une uniformite de nomenclature necessaire pour 
toutes les parties de la Eepublique." This is a decree of the 
National Convention, June 10, 1793. The collection which 
Decaisne has so diligently and acutely studied actually dates 
from the year 1792, when the fruit-garden of the Chartreux 
of Paris was broken up, and two trees of each variety transported 
to the Jardin des Plantes. In 1793 it contained 185 
varieties. In 1824, when Thouin died, there were in it 265 
varieties of pears alone ; it has now more than 1400 varieties 
of this fruit. It is interesting and important to know that 
the collection still preserves the greater portion of the very 
types described a century ago by Duhamel. For seven years 
Professor Decaisne studied the incomparable collection under 
his charge, making drawings and analyses, in which he is so 
skilful, and an herbarium of their flowers and foliage, before 
he commenced the publication of the " Jardin Fruitier du 
Museum," which he is now bringing to a close. 
As to giving a correct nomenclature and available characters, 
this is difficult enough, as all botanists know, for the 
species themselves (which must needs have, or be assumed to 
have, real distinctions) in any large genus, such as Quercus, 
Rosa, Eubus, and the like ; how much more difficult, even to 
impossibility, it must be in the case of cultivated varieties, of 
ever increasing numbers, usually named without system, sometimes 
of mixed origin, and often too like each other to be distinguished 
by any available descriptions. Here colored plates 
are a necessity ; and those of this great standard work, upon 
which no pains have been spared, leave little to be desired 
that art can supply. 
In France alone they count about 800 sorts of pears ; the 
origin of most of them is unknown, and many are undoubtedly 
very ancient. Indeed, according to Jordan and his school 
these differences are primitive, and the so-called races and 
varieties, both of wild and cultivated plants, represent so many 
closely related species. But M. Decaisne, not content with 
the reductio ad absurdum of having about 2000 species of 
pears to be dealt with, proceeded to an experimental demonstration 
of the variability of the cultivated races. He sowed 
the seeds from four very distinct varieties in 1853, the Boire 
d'Angleterre, the Bose, the Belle Alliance, and the Cirole. 
Of the last the four trees raised bore fruit of four different 
forms. From the Belle Alliance he obtained, in this first 
generation, nine new varieties, none of them representing the 
parent, neither in the form, size, color, nor even the time of 
ripening of the fruit. The Bose equally produced new varieties. 
Of the Angleterre nine trees produced as many new 
forms, one of them a winter-pear similar to the Saint Germain, 
another apple-shaped fruit identical with one which 
was raised from the Belle Alliance. On plate 33, Decaisne 
gives figures of six different pears raised from the Angleterre. 
These results even led him to doubt the cases cited by Darwin 
of the reproduction of certain pears from seed. He insists, 
moreover, that very bad fruits may be raised from choice cultivated 
pears, and that good varieties may be obtained from 
the seeds of wild pears. The latter is not what one would 
expect in the first generation. 
— x o 
Our author proceeds to state that the trees raised from seed 
taken from the same fruit differed, not merely in their fruits 
and in the time of ripening, but no less in their flowers and 
in the form of the leaves. Some were thorny, others thornless 
; some produced slender shoots, others thick and stout 
shoots, etc. It is worth noticing, however, that no mention is 
made of any precautions to prevent cross-fertilization of the 
flowers from which the seeds planted were derived, which 
might have influenced the product through the now well-ascertained 
influence of the pollen upon the pericarp. We perceive, 
however, that he would regard this as unimportant, 
since pear varieties are of the lowest grade, incapable of propagating 
fruit by close-fertilization, and therefore wholly unlikely 
to impress by their pollen any characteristic upon the 
pericarp of another variety. 1 A large part of the Introduction 
is occupied with further evidence that the Bear-trees of 
cultivation are all of one species, from which have proceeded 
six races completely fertile inter se, and varieties ad infinitum. 
In this respect the Pear-tree has but followed the example of 
most fruit and fruit-trees, and of the Grains, etc., which had 
apparently diverged into races, or distinct but closely related 
types, in very early times, and those under cultivation have 
themselves varied and subdivided more and more. Finally, 
M. Decaisne maintains, seemingly with good reason, that to 
combine into one genus the Apple, Pear, Quince, Sorb, and 
Mountain Ash, as done by Linnaeus and followed by the latest 
authorities, is to misconceive the laws of the natural system ; 
that "to unite generically these plants, which differ in the 
character of their wood, the vernation of their leaves, their 
inflorescence, the aestivation of the corolla, and the structure 
of their fruit," logically leads to the combination of all Pomacem 
into one genus. He accordingly restricts the genus 
Pyrus, or (restoring the classical orthography) Pirus, as did 
Tournefort and Jussieu, to the Pear proper. To the organography 
of this restricted genus, from the wood to the embryo, 
a full chapter is devoted. In the course of this the relative 
systematic value of characters observed is brought out. He 
1 Yet the Apple, which is in the same case, does so. An interesting 
instance of this kind lately came under our notice, an apple from a Spitzenberg 
tree, one half (at least as to the surface) Spitzenberg, the other 
half Russet. A tree of the latter fruit stood about 200 yards off. Several 
cases of this sort are known, in which, as in this, the division is into two 
exactly equal parts of the circumference, and the line of demarcation 
abrupt. This is quite unexpected, as the Secretary of the Smithsonian 
Institution, who sent us the fruit, remarked ; for as the styles and carpels 
were five, we should have expected the division to be into fifths, and according 
to the number of the stigmas which were acted upon by the foreign 
pollen. It is, moreover, to be noticed that the action of the pollen 
hi this case is manifest upon what is morphologically the calyx, not upon 
the pericarp. The apple we refer to was grown in the orchard of William 
Wicksham, of Washington County, Pennsylvania. —A. G. 
notes that the vernation of the leaves is involute in Pyrus, 
but not in Cydonia, Mespilus, and Aria; that the cottonyleaved 
varieties, no less than the smooth ones, are glabrous 
in the seedling stage ; that all varieties of the common Pear 
blossom at Paris whenever, in the month of April, the mean 
temperature reaches about 10° Centigrade, without perceptible 
difference between the earliest and the latest-ripening varieties 
; that the aestivation of the corolla is convolute in Cydonia, 
but imbricate in the Pear, although ordinarily quincuncial 
in other Pomacem (but in the two diagrams of Pear-flowers 
on Plate A, one has the quincuncial, i. e., in our view typically 
imbricative aestivation of the corolla ; in the other, there is 
only one wholly outer and one inner petal, — a combination of 
the quincuncial and the convolute modes which often occurs, 
but which need not be taken as the type of imbrication) ; that 
there are two types as to size of the corolla in the common 
Pear, the smaller flowered type comprehending most of the 
cultivated varieties ; that the odor of Pear-blossoms is rather 
disagreeable than otherwise, in contrast with those of Malus, 
which are sweet-scented. Moreover, the anthers in the Pear 
genus are tinged with violet ; those of the Apple genus are 
yellow. 
As to the morphology and development of the gynaecium, 
Decaisne reproduces in full the note which he published in 
the " Bulletin of the Botanical Society of France " in 1857. 
From his investigation it appears that the five carpels in their 
early development are free and distinct in the concave centre 
of the flower ; that at a later stage, when the concave receptacle 
has become much deeper, a cellular tissue develops from 
its base and inner face, moulds itself around and over the carpels, 
so as separately to envelop them, except at their inner 
angle, while it carries up the petals and stamens, and forms 
the perigynous disk upon which they are inserted ; this forms 
the core or central part of the flesh of the fruit, which we 
have always regarded as receptacle, never ceasing to protest 
against the still prevalent notion (continued in the latest general 
works), that the cartilaginous or bony "cells" are " endocarp." 
But, while we were disposed to regard the whole 
190 REVIEWS. 
exterior flesh as calyx, Professor Decaisne (no doubt correctly) 
regards it as mainly receptacle or axis, an hypanthium 
which in common pears is largely a hypertrophy of the 
peduncle, after the fashion of Anacardium. 
In the proper Pear genus, the ovules never exceed a single 
pair ; this should therefore enter into the generic character. 
" Theophrastus had already remarked that the older the 
Pear-tree, the more prolific, and every day's experience confirms 
the justice of this observation." The gritty grains or 
lignified cells which are so abundant in the flesh of many 
sorts of pears are not wholly absent from any of them. To 
them is due the roughish surface of the skin, as contrasted 
with the smooth skin of apples. It is curious to remark that 
Meyen, in his " Pflanzen-Pathologie," considered the gritty 
grains to be a disease which attacked pears and quinces. 
It appears that pear-growers are able to produce fruits of 
abnormal size by supporting the growing pear from underneath, 
instead of allowing it to hang on the peduncle. M. 
Decaisne has seen Poires de Livre of a kilogram, Glou- 
morceau of 600 grams, and a Chaumontel of 700 grams 
Weight, produced in this way. 
The testa of all Pomaceous seeds is smooth and more or 
less mucilaginous, except of a Photinia, in which it is reticulated. 
The cotyledons are accumbent relative to the rhaphe, 
except in a Photinia, Cotoneaster, Pyracantha {Cratmgus 
Pyracantha, Pers.), and Eriobotrya, in which they are incumbent. 
At first there is a thin layer of albumen, which disappears 
at maturity of the seed. 
Pears are commonly grafted upon a Quince stock. But it 
is confidently asserted, and generally supposed, that there are 
more than forty varieties which absolutely refuse this union, 
and which are therefore managed by subgrafting upon a Bear 
stock of a proper sort which has itself been engrafted upon 
the Quince. But, as Professor Decaisne remarks, horticulturists 
are too apt to generalize their impressions and to limit 
nature to the narrow horizon of their own practice. Upon 
the first trial of the experiment under his own observation, he 
succeeded with twenty of these antipathetic varieties without 
the least difficulty ; but some (among which are the Clairgeau 
and the Bose) obstinately refuse to unite with the Quince 
stock. He naturally discredits the assertion made by Cabanis 
and by Downing (cited by Darwin), that when certain pears 
are grafted on the Quince, their seeds produce trees of types 
different from those which they do when they are raised upon 
a Pear stock. Decaisne found, as already stated, that Pearseeds 
produce indifferently new varieties in any case ; that 
these varieties are not at all fixed into races. He regards as 
wholly unproven all the assertions that the fruit is ameliorated 
or in any degree altered by grafting upon a Quince or any 
other stock. He records a very exceptional instance in which 
the antipathy of the Pear to the Apple as a stock was so far 
overcome that the graft survived at least six years, but without 
vigor, and bore fruit ; still this antipathy confirms the 
generic difference between Pyrus and Malus. 
We must pass over the sections on the diseases of the Pear, 
and the parasitic plants and insects hurtful to it : while as to 
that on the classification of the Pears of cultivation, we may 
mention merely the conclusion, which is, that a natural classification 
of Pears is thus far an impossibility ; and that in 
practice nothing better can be done than to follow the example 
of the older pomologists, who arranged them according to 
the period of ripening. A general list of the adopted names 
of the published varieties of cultivated Pears, alphabetically 
arranged, fills four pages of the volume. A list of their synonyms, 
in which each is referred to the adopted name, fills over 
12 pages ! Then follows a list of pears classed according to 
the period of maturing, and in which the best varieties are 
designated. 
Finally comes a botanical monograph of the genus Pyrus, 
with a full generic character, and descriptions and figures of 
the races, as he would term them, considering as he does all 
known forms of the restricted genus as a single and very 
polymorphous species. 
The six races are: 1. The Celtic, Proles Armoricana, of 
three quasi-species, P. cordata, Boissieriana, and longipes. 
2. The Germanic, Proles Germanica, or Pyrus communis, 
192 REVIEWS. 
including our common pears, both pear-shaped and appleshaped, 
" both forms being often met with upon the same 
tree." Under this head Professor Decaisne gives some interesting 
pages upon the history of the cultivation of pears in 
France, which cannot be ancient, and of cider (perry) as 
a drink. It appears that it took the place of beer in the 
north of France in the fifteenth century or later, and is now 
giving way to wine and perhaps beer again ; and that pears 
would have disappeared before this from a part of Normandy, 
were it not that they are carried in immense quantities to 
Epernay, where they are used in the manufacture of champagne. 
3. The Hellenic Eace, which comprises P. parviflora 
and three other subspecies. 4. The Pontic Eace, P. salicifolia 
and its allies. 5. The Indian Eace, P. Pashia and 
its relatives. 6. The Mongolian Eace, P. Sinensis and its 
varieties. As one turns over the excellent plates one can 
hardly be persuaded that such extremely diverse forms can 
practically be regarded as of one species. 
A list of the species remanded from Pyrus to other genera 
shows that the result of our author's prolonged and sagacious 
study is to increase the genera about as much as he diminishes 
the species of the Linnaean Pyrus. 
A detailed analysis of Decaisne's monograph of the genus 
Pyrus was given in this Journal (3 ser., iv. 489, Dec, 1872). 
Some of the views taken in that work are fully expounded in 
the present paper, 1 which embracing the results of a prolonged 
study of an important group, by a botanist of great experience 
and ability, is worthy of particular attention. As the veteran 
author states it : — 
" My principal object is here to call the attention of botanists 
to certain characters which have been neglected m systematic 
works, by the aid of which the ancient genera merged 
in Pyrus by most of the recent systematists may be neatly 
circumscribed. Such is the constancy and the value of these 
characters that the details of organization peculiar to each 
generic group may be expressed by very general propositions, 
1 Memoire sur la Famille des Pomace'es. Par J. Decaisne {Nouvelles 
Archives du Museum, x. pp. 113, 192). Paris, 1875. 
which is the very object of a good method. Indeed, when a 
special organization is common to a large number of different 
plants, it is evident that comparatively slight but constant 
modifications of this structure ought to be particularly attended 
to ; and this proposition seems to be especially true of the 
Pomacem." M. Decaisne puts foremost his strongest point 
when he declares of the Quince, that " the nature of its bark 
and wood, its prefoliation, inflorescence, the aestivation of the 
corolla, the structure of the ovary and of the fruit differ essentially 
from that of the Pears, among which certain botanists 
still class it." Bather than combine the Quince and the 
Japan Quince with Pyrus, we are confident that botanists 
will generally accept his Docynia, along with Chaenomeles 
Lindl. and Cydonia, as independent genera. The same may 
be said of Mespilus ; and it must be allowed that the character 
which Kunth had noticed and which Decaisne has turned 
to account, that of the deformation of one of the ovules which 
becomes a kind of stipitate hood for the other, being common 
to it and to Crataegus, indicates a relationship to the latter 
genus rather than to Pyrus. Much nicer and more questionable 
characters are assigned to the genera here re-established 
from Pyrus in the Candollean sense, to which we are in this 
generation accustomed. These are, Aronia, Pers., our Chokeberry 
(in which eight species are set up from what we take to 
be a single polymorphous one) ; Sorbus, Tourn., the Mountain 
Ash (the synonym S. microcarpa omitted from S. Americana, 
and S. sambucifolia is still taken to belong only to our western 
coast, whereas it extends across the continent) ; Aria, 
Host., the Beam Trees, all of the Old World ; Torminaria, 
Eoem., for Pyrus torminalis ; also Cormus, Spach, for Sorbus 
domestica,Li., the Service-tree of Europe, with Pyrus 
trilobata, DC, and an allied species ; Micromeles, a new genus 
for four Himalayan species thus far little known ; lastly, 
Malus, Tourn. Here it is to be observed that M. diver sifolia 
is held to be distinct from M. rivularis ; and that a subgenus, 
Chloromeles, proposed for M. angustifolia, our narrow-leaved 
Crab-Apple, thus widely separated from M. coronaria, on 
account, as is stated, of its reddish anthers and the structure 
194 REVIEWS. 
MONOGRAPH OF THE GENUS PYRUS. 195 
of the disk. Pyrus, Tourn., is thus brought down to the 
Pear ; and this, as Decaisne had formerly announced, to a 
single collective species, of six geographical proles or forms. 
We continue to write Pyrus from old habit and custom, not 
doubting, however, that Pirus is the correct orthography. 
Of Amelanchier, following Lindley, there are enumerated 
twelve species, six for the Old World and six for North 
America, and there are names for four more. Without being 
able to clear them up (and no wonder), Decaisne thinks that 
they may be distinguished into at least three groups, characterized 
by the distinct or united styles, and the glabrous or 
downy ovaries. We are continually impressed with the idea 
that there must be three or four American species, and the 
seeds may aid in their definition. But thus far the characters 
elude investigation. Beraphyllum, Nutt., referred by Bentham 
and Hooker to Amelanchier, has not been studied by 
Decaisne. When he examines the excellent specimens in 
flower and in fruit, which Mr. Sder has supplied from southern 
Utah, he will conclude that the genus must certainly be 
reinstated. The likeness is only in the peculiar structure of 
the fruit. 
As respects the remaining genera, the difference between 
this monograph and the disposition in Bentham and Hooker's 
" Genera Plantarum" is mainly this : Eriobotrya, with its baccate 
fruit (what is termed endocarp reduced to a soft pellicle), 
large turgid seeds with thickened cotyledons, and undulate 
petals, is upheld as a good genus ; Heteromeles is adopted 
from J. Bcemer for the Californian Photinia arbutifoha, 
and a second (probably not good) species, H. Fremontiana 
is added. The characters appear to be the 10 instead of 2U 
stamens, in pairs opposite the calyx-lobes, their filaments 
dilated at base and somewhat monadelphous. In the tabular 
conspectus the petals are said to have « prefloraison tordue 
but in the generic character it is " aestivatione imbricativa vel 
convolutiva " the latter term with the French botanists meaning 
the same as imbricated, only more enrolling. The diagram 
represents the whole five petals with one edge covered, i. e., 
"tordue" or contorted (or, as we say, convolute), and so we 
find them in all the flower-buds now examined. But before 
adopting the genus it may be well to examine the Photinim 
generally. Bhotinia, of which P. serrulata is the type, is 
characterized as having imbricative aestivation, and Decaisne's 
diagram represents it as regularly {i. e., quincuncially) so. 
But in P. prunifolia and in P. Blumei we find occasionally 
only one exterior petal, and the four others successively overlapping 
in the " contorted " way ; and in one of Wallich's 
specimens of P. integrifolia the first flower-bud inspected 
showed the " contorted " aestivation complete. This is also 
the case in P. dubia (in one of Hooker's and Thompson's 
Khasyia specimens), and this Decaisne refers to Eriobotrya, 
which has imbricative aestivation. Next is Pourthiaea, a new 
genus of eleven Japanese and Indian species, the type being 
Photinia arguta, villosa, Imvis, etc., and the character, among 
others, " aestivatione contorta." But we as commonly find 
one petal wholly exterior. So we think it evident that the 
aestivation of the corolla furnishes no characters for the division 
of the genus Bhotinia. 
Finally, as to the proper stone-fruited genera, Pyracantha 
is adopted from J. Eoemer for Gratmgus Pyracantha and 
an allied Indo-Chinese species, and placed near Cotoneaster ; 
and a character not before used is introduced, namely, the 
position of the cotyledons, which in this genus are, as regards 
the rhaphe, accumbent. 
There are eight plates, six of them filled with admirable 
dissections, neatly done upon stone by Eiocreux from the 
author's sketches. 
ENGELMANN'S NOTES ON THE GENUS YUCCA. 
This modest title comprises the principal results of Dr. 
Engelmann's long study of a difficult genus of plants. Pursuing 
his botanical investigations now for many years only 
1 Notes on the Genus Yucca. By George Engelmann, in Trans. St. Louis 
Acad. Hi. St. Louis, 1873. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., 
vi. 468.) 
in the intervals and spare moments of a busy and exacting 
professional life, Dr. Engelmann has made them tell most 
effectively and advantageously upon the science which numbers 
him as a distinguished votary, by taking up one subject 
at a time and investigating it as thoroughly as possible. In 
this way he has mastered, in turn, our Cuscutm (upon which 
his earliest essay was published in this Journal, thirty-one 
years ago, and his latest was a full monograph of all the 
known species throughout the world), our Cactacem, our Mistletoes, 
Euphorbias, Junci, Callitriches, etc., not to speak of 
several other genera or groups, or taking account of his sedulous 
and long-continued study of our Oaks, and, above all, of 
our Coniform. Nor need we look to this as the close of the 
series, but rather see before him " fresh fields and pastures 
new r ," and wish for him more time to expatiate in them. 
Upon the principle " to him that hath shall be given," he well 
deserves it, as having accomplished far more in these rescued 
moments than others who could mainly devote their days as 
well as nights to scientific work. Almost without exception 
these monographs relate to difficult subjects, and such as require 
long-protracted investigation. This is also true of the 
present essay upon the genus Yucca. It is not a large one, 
only a dozen species being clearly made out ; but those of 
long cultivation in Europe have been much confused, and 
recent ones described without flowers, while fruit is rarely 
formed out of their native stations, and dried specimens of 
any completeness are difficult to make, so that means of comparison 
are much restricted. 
The true anthesis, as is now shown, is nocturnal, the flowers 
remaining half closed during the day. The anthers, with 
comparatively large and few grains of glutinous pollen, open 
rather earlier than the flower. The tips of the style, which 
were naturally taken for stigmas, are now shown to be functionless, 
the stigmatic surface being the moist and glutinous 
lining of a stylar tube, which extends downward nearly to the 
cells of the ovary and even communicates directly with them. 
As soon as it became evident that fertilization must depend 
upon nocturnal insects, it was found that they were most fre- <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:50:30 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

variety australis, forms " trees twenty-five to thirty feet high, 
and two or three feet in diameter, with ten or a dozen 
branches," or sometimes reaches to even fifty feet of elevation 
according to the late Dr. Gregg, although the most northern 
form of it is almost stemless. Its pulpy fruits are " savory, 
like dates," are eaten fresh by both whites and Indians, and 
are cured by the latter for winter provisions. They also make 
a stew of the flower - buds and flowers, which Dr. Palmer 
found to be pleasant and nourishing. The seeds are said to 
be actively purgative. The fibers of the leaves are used for 
cordage, the trunks for palings, or are riven into slabs for the 
coverings of huts, and the tender top of the stem is roasted 
and eaten. 
Professor Eiley's curious paper upon the mutual relations 
of Yuccas with Pronuba, a Tineideous moth that does the 
work of pollination, will be read with interest. 
RUSKIN'S PROSERPINA. 
Mr. Buskin, " having been privileged to found the School 
of Art in the University of Oxford," now proposes to found a 
new school of botany. 1 Of course, it will be a vagarious 
school. One crying evil to be remedied is " that there are 
generally from three or four up to two dozen Latin names 
current for every flower," and " the most current and authoritative 
names " are "of the devil's own contriving." This is 
not seemly. As Wesley would not allow the devil to have 
the singing of all the good tunes, so neither will Buskin allow 
nim to have the naming of all the sweet flowers. He proposes 
"to substitute boldly . . . other generic names for the plants 
thus faultfully hitherto titled." He " will not even name the 
cases in which they have been made," but will " mask those 
which there was real occasion to alter by sometimes giving 
new names in cases where there was no necessity of such kind." 
1 Proserpina, Studies of Wayside Flowers, etc. By John Ruskin. 
London and New York, 1875. (The Nation, No. 528, August 12, 1875.) 
That is to say, the evil of a redundancy of botanical names is 
to be overcome by making more, some of them avowedly needless 
; and innocent names are to suffer, lest bad ones should 
become notorious by being discarded without company. For 
it appears that the diabolical names to be sent to their own 
place in this reform are not discarded because they are 
cacophonous, although that is the common charge, but because 
they are immoral. Of the two evils to be dealt with, the first 
is simply a superfluity of Latin names ; the second, and the 
worse, a superfluity of naughtiness. As Mr. Buskin forcibly 
puts it : — 
" The second, and a much more serious one, is of the devil's 
own contriving (and, remember, I am always quite serious 
when I speak of the devil), namely, ■ — that the most current 
and authoritative names are apt to be founded on some unclean 
or debasing association, so that to interpret them is to 
defile the reader's mind." 
This reminds us of the fine lady who thanked Dr. Johnson 
for omitting indelicate words from his dictionary, to whom the 
blunt moralist rejoined : " I perceive, madam, that you have 
been looking for them." Now r , if the case be really as it is 
represented, the sound practical axiom, " Quieta non movere," 
would seem to suggest the proper treatment ; for his purposes, 
one would think the Latin and Greek names might be left 
untranslated ; and the reform might begin, and end, with the 
popular English names, — almost the only ones the author 
may need to use, — some of which are coarse and vulgar 
enough. Indeed, as to botanical generic names, far from finding 
any confirmation of Mr. Buskin's sweeping charges, we 
can recall barely one or two the translation or etymology of 
which would be embarrassing at the parlor-table. Moreover, 
if the following passages really refer to " nomenclature ' 
(though terminology seems to be meant), our author, upon his 
own showing, need not waste his time in the endeavor to 
reform it : — 
" The mass of useless nomenclature, now mistaken for science, 
will fall away, as the husk of a poppy falls from the 
bursting flower. . . . When the science becomes approxi- 
mately perfect, all known plants will be properly figured, so 
that nobody need describe them, and unknown plants will be 
so rare that nobody will care to learn a new and difficult 
lano'iia^e in order to give an account of what in all probability 
he will never see." 
Well, for that matter, the English Botany, in its various 
editions, furnishes fairly good figures of all British plants; 
and the "Botanical Magazine " — a page of an early number 
of which, eighty years old, is gibbeted by Mr. Buskin— has 
gone on to figure more than 6000 cultivated exotics, and is 
continuing at the rate of nearly a hundred a year ; so that 
our author's ideal is practically all but realized already. 
There are wellnigh pictures enough, if one knows how and 
where to find them. And it amusingly appears, from Mr. 
Buskin's trouble with St. Bruno's Lily at the beginning, and 
from his investigation of moss further on, as well as from 
scattered statements, that his mode of proceeding in .systematic 
botany is the simple one of searching high and low for 
a picture to match the specimen in hand. Accordingly, it is 
not surprising that his "botanical studies were, when [he] 
bad attained the age of fifty, no further advanced than the 
reader will find them in the opening chapter of this book." 
As to this, the conclusions which the reader will draw are 
all along anticipated by the author. Next to the pervading — 
well — bumptiousness, nothing is so prominent in the book as 
the profession, not to say the parade, of ignorance of the topics 
treated. As to "the elements of the science of botany," "I 
can scarcely say that I have yet any tenure of it myself." 
" And, meanwhile I don't know very clearly so much as what 
a root is or what a leaf is." " Some one said of me once, very 
shrewdly, When he wants to work out a subject, he writes a 
took on it. . . . This book will be nothing but processes. I 
don't mean to assert anything positively in it, from the first 
Page to the last. Whatever I say is to be understood only as 
a conditional statement — liable to and inviting correction. 
And this the more because, as on the whole I am at war with 
the botanists, I can't ask them to help me, and then call them 
names afterwards." So " for many reasons, I am forced to 
print the imperfect statement, as I can independently shape it." 
To get at the facts, " I should have to write a dozen of letters 
before I could print a line, and the line at last would be only 
like a bit of any other botanical book — trustworthy, it might 
be perhaps, but certainly unreadable." The converse is preferred. 
Eeadable it certainly is, and in its way interesting, 
not so much for what it tells about botany as for what it tells 
about Mr. Buskin ; and the art student, out of the abundance 
of golden chaff, may pick some grains of knowledge that might 
not otherwise fall in his way. But the seeker of botanical 
information must glean warily, especially where the author 
grows positive. For almost the only instance in which he 
does pronounce decidedly happens to be a vexed question in 
vegetable physiology, and there is reason to fear that he decides 
it wrongly. At least the recent investigators who have 
had the matter in hand in the way of experimental inquiry, 
will not agree with him that the plant can get water from the 
atmosphere directly and " for the most part does so ; though 
when it cannot get water from the air, it will gladly drink by 
its roots." Still " our natural and honest mistakes will often 
be suggestive of things we could not have discovered but by 
wandering." Very likely ; but why invite learners to go forth 
with him upon his wanderings ? In many a book the want of 
sufficient knowledge is pleaded as an excuse ; in this, it is 
paraded as a recommendation. Ignorance, no doubt, has its 
uses ; but it is questionable whether teaching is altogether 
the best use to put it to. As the member of Parliament who 
yawned desperately while delivering his speech was thought 
to trench upon the privilege of his hearers, so the students of 
"Proserpina" may complain that the playing of the role both 
of teacher and learner at once involves some incongruity and 
inconveniences. 
The second part of " Proserpina " has just come to hand. 
It treats of the leaf and the flower, in a discursive and oracular 
way, leading into aesthetical questions, where we need not 
follow and do not greatly admire. Now and then a scientific 
topic is taken up, and the point missed, as usual. Treating 
of foliage and its office, we are bid " to think awhile of its dark 
clear green, and the good of it to you." We look for an exposition 
of the fact, in which the whole meaning of vegetation 
inheres, that leaves under the sun's influence create all the 
food of the world, and are therefore the basis of all animal 
existence. Instead of which we have : — 
" Scientifically, you know, green in leaves is owing to ' chlorophyll,' 
or, in English, to ' green leaf.' It may be very fine 
to know that ; but my advice to you, on the whole, is to rest 
content with the general fact that leaves are green when they 
do not grow in or near smoky towns, and not by any means 
to rest content with the fact that very soon there will not be 
a green leaf in England, but only greenish-black ones. . . . 
Well, this much the botanists really know and tell us " — 
that vegetation "is made chiefly of the breath of animals. 
• • . So that you may look upon the grass and forests of the 
earth as a kind of green hoar-frost, frozen upon it from our 
breath, as, on the window panes, the white arborescence of 
ice." 
Mr. Buskin evidently has no idea of the essential independence 
of the vegetable kingdom ; that, as all the carbon of the 
breath of animals comes from plants, so they, in their decay, 
would furnish this material for succeeding vegetation perhaps 
as rapidly, on the whole, without the intervention of animals. 
At most, the latter somewhat expedite the decomposition. 
" But how is it made into wood ? " As to that and matters 
therewith connected, " under the impression that it had been 
ascertained, and that I could at any time know all about it, 
I have put off till to-day the knowing of anything about it at 
all. But I will really endeavor now to ascertain something, 
and take to my botanical books accordingly." 
Behold the result of the cram, "the gist of the matter' : — 
"Hence generally, I think we may conclude thus much, 
that at every pore of its surface, under ground and above, the 
Plant in the spring absorbs moisture, which instantly disperses 
itself through its whole system 'by means of some permeable 
quality of the membranes of the cellular tissue invisible to our 
eyes even by the most powerful glasses ' ; that in this way 
subjected to the vital power of the tree, it becomes sap, prop- 
erly so called, which passes downwards through this cellular 
tissue, slowly and secretly ; and then upwards, through the 
great vessels of the tree, violently, stretching out the supple 
twigs of it as you see a flaccid water-pipe swell and, move 
when the cock is turned to fill it. And the tree becomes literally 
a fountain, of which the springing streamlets are clothed 
with new-woven garments of green tissue, and of which the 
silver spray stays in the sky — a spray, now, of leaves." 
Then as to the blossom : " The flower exists for its own 
sake, not for the fruit's sake. . . . But the flower is the end 
of the seed, not the seed of the flower." " The corolla leads 
and is the object of final purpose. The stamens and the 
treasuries [Mr. Buskin's new term for pistils] are only there 
in order to produce future corollas." Without criticising anybody's 
notion of final causes, we only notice how Mr. Buskin 
fails to make his own point. He has seen " among the speculations 
of modern science, several, lately, not uningenious, and 
highly industrious, on the subject of the relation of color 
in flowers to insects, to selective development," etc. And he 
proceeds to intimate that even Mr. Darwin must be ranked 
among " the men of semi-faculty or semi-education who are 
more or less incapable of so much as seeing, much less thinking 
about color," etc., referring merely to the latter's speculations 
upon the ocelli of the Argus Pheasant, in blissful ignorance, 
it would seem, that he has to deal with Mr. Darwin 
upon this very subject of color and use in flowers, and that he 
is not prepared even to state his own side of the question. 
EMERSON'S TREES AND SHRUBS OF MASSACHUSETTS. 
Teee-LORE l is no longer confined to the few, and books like 
this address a large and various audience, or will do so when 
they become better known. Mr. Emerson's original volume 
1 A Report on the Trees and Shrubs of Massachusetts, growing naturally 
in the forests of Massachusetts. By George B. Emerson. 2d ed. Boston, 
1875. (The Nation, No. 539, October 8, 1875.) 
TREES AND SHRUBS OF MASSACHUSETTS. 205 
was published twenty-five years ago, " agreeably to an order 
of the Legislature, by the Commissioners on the Zoological 
and Botanical Survey of the State" of Massachusetts, being 
a supplement to the Geological Survey of that period, prosecuted 
under Edward Everett's governorship. It was the most 
popular report of the series, and the edition was ere long 
exhausted. When this came to pass — without waiting for 
the new survey which the State last year came near authorizing 
but failed to do so — Mr. Emerson, unassisted, set about 
the preparation of a new edition, devoted several years to it, 
and to the study of what had been done for the preservation 
and utilization of forests in the Old World, and for their 
waste and destruction here in the New ; and he has at length 
brought out this second edition, in two goodly octavo volumes, 
illustrated and adorned by a large number of well-executed 
plates. These being interspersed through the pages, unnumbered, 
and nowhere enumerated, the only way of ascertaining 
their actual amount was to count them. We find 144 plates, 
of various kinds and merits. The least satisfying to us 
are those of portraitistic or scenic character, borrowed from 
the German "Der Wald " and the very French "Vegetable 
World "of Figuier ; yet to others these may be the most 
attractive. Very good, though unpretending, are figures, 
mainly in outline, contributed by Mr. Isaac Sprague to the 
first edition, here reproduced. Best of all are those contributed 
by the same hand to the new edition, original figures of 
the foliage, flowers, and fruit of many of our trees and shrubs 
not before illustrated, transferred from Sprague's drawings to 
stone, and printed in colors. The plates representing our two 
northern Azaleas, the Boxbury Waxwork (as they name it 
around Boston), the Virginian Creeper in its autumn dress ; 
the Bed Maple, both in vernal and autumnal robes ; and the 
Flowering Easpberry, from which seemingly one may almost 
*ake the mountain dew, are good illustrations of what may 
be done in this way. Hand-coloring is too expensive, and 
chromo-lithography can really be turned to excellent account 
in its place for natural-history illustrations, whatever be its 
merits or demerits in other regions of art. The letter-press 
we find is a reprint of the first edition, as to the descriptive 
part. The popular descriptions seem to have hit the mark. 
Mr. Emerson's instructions and appeals for the planting 
and care of trees, and for the renovation of our woods, wherever 
practicable and profitable, are worthy of all attention, as 
his efforts in this regard are worthy of all honor. They began 
long ago, and have been redoubled now in his later years, m 
this° work and elsewhere. The memorial addressed to the 
President and Congress by the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science he took a large part in preparing ; 
and his personal furtherance of it at Washington, of which 
he makes modest mention in the preface, may yet be fruitful 
of benefit. It may not be improper to add that the only 
permanently endowed arboretum in America — the Arnold 
Arboretum, entrusted to Harvard University — owes its existence 
to our author's thoughtfulness and sense of the im- 
portance of tree-culture. 
DARWIN'S INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS. 
This long expected work appeared last autumn, was immediately 
reprinted by the American publishers, and before this 
time has been so widely read that no detailed account of it is 
at all necessary. Its main topic is Drosera or Sundew, upon 
which the vast number and diversity of the observations and 
experiments — at once simple, sagacious, and telling — which 
it records, are about as wonderful as the results. As to the 
latter, it is established beyond question that the common 
Sundews are efficient fly-catchers ; that the stalked glands, or 
tentacles as Mr. Darwin terms them, are sensitive and turn 
inward or even in other required directions in response to 
irritation ; that they equally respond and move in obedience 
to a stimulus propagated from a distance through other tentacles 
and across the whole width of the leaf ; that the sensi- 
i Insectivorous Plants. By Charles Darwin. London and New York, 
1875. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xi. 69.) 
tiveness belongs only to the glands and tips of the tentacles, 
but is propagated thence down their stalks and across the 
blade of the leaf through the cellular tissues ; that they accurately 
and delicately discriminate animal or other nitrogenous 
matter from anything else ; that the glands absorb such matter 
; that when excited by contact, or by the absorption of 
nitrogenous matter by the viscid enveloping liquid, an acid 
secretion is poured out and a ferment analogous to pepsin, 
the two together dissolving animal matter ; so that the office 
and action of these glands are truly analogous to those of the 
glands of the stomach of animals. Finally, that animal or 
nitrogenous matter, thus absorbed and digested m the glands, 
is taken in, and conveyed from cell to cell through the tentacles 
into the body of the leaf, was made evident by ocular 
inspection of the singular changes in the protoplasm they contain. 
So particularly have the investigations been made and 
so conscientiously recorded, that the account of those relating 
to one species of Sundew, Drosera rotundifolia, fills 277 
Pages of the English edition, or more than half of the book. 
After all it ends with the remark : " and we see how little 
has been made out in comparison with what remains unexplained 
and unknown." The briefer examination of six other 
Sundews follows, some of them equally and others less effi- 
ciently fly-catchers and feeders. 
Dionaja is next treated, but with less detail. Indeed, except 
as to the particular nature of the secreted digesting fluid, 
there is little in this chapter that had not been made out or 
already become familiar here. That the secretion has digestive 
powers, and that it is reabsorbed along with whatever 
has been digested, is now proved beyond reasonable doubt. 
That the motor impulse is conveyed through the cellular parenchyma, 
and not through the vascular bundles, or spiral vessels, 
and that the latter do not originate the secretion, as Kees 
and Wills in a recent paper seem to suppose they must, appears 
to be shown by the facts, and was antecedently probable. 
"The wonderful discovery made by Dr. Burdon Sanderson is 
now universally known: namely, that there exists a normal 
electrical current in the blade and footstalk, and that when 
the leaves are irritated the current is disturbed in the same 
manner as takes place during the contraction of the muscle of 
an animal." The conclusion here needs to be checked by 
parallel experiments, to see whether the same reversion of 
current does not take place whenever a part of any loaf or 
green shoot is forcibly bent upon itself. 
Aldrovanda vesiculosa, of the Drosera family, " may be 
called a miniature aquatic Dionaea ; " for, as discovered by 
Stein in 1873, " the bilobed leaves open under a sufficiently 
high temperature, and when touched suddenly close." Being 
submerged, their prey is confined to minute aquatic animals. 
For want of proper material and opportunity, Mr. Darwin 
was able to follow up only for a little way the observations of 
Stein and Cohn, — enough, however, to show that it also captures 
and consumes animals, but perhaps avails itself of the 
nitrogenous matter only when passing into decay. 
Drosophyllum, a rare representative of the order, confined 
to Bortugal and Morocco, grows on the sides of dry hills near 
Oporto ; so that, as to station, it is the very counterpart of 
Aldrovanda. Its leaves are long and slender, in the manner 
of our Drosera filiformis, and are covered with much larger 
glands. To these, flies adhere in vast numbers. " The latter 
fact is well known to the villagers, who call the plant the 
' fly-catcher,' and hang it up in their cottages for this purpose." 
Mr. Darwin found the glands incapable of movement, and 
their behavior hi some other respects differs from that of 
Drosera ; but they equally secrete a digestive juice. Insects 
usually drag off this secretion instead of being fixed on the 
glands by it ; but their fate is no better ; for as the poor animal 
crawls on and these viscid drops bedaub it on all sides, it 
sinks down at length exhausted or dead, and rests on a still 
more numerous set of small sessile glands which thickly cover 
the whole surface of the leaf. These were till then dry and 
inert, but as soon as animal matter thus comes in contact 
with them, they also secrete a digestive juice, which, as Mr. 
Darwin demonstrated, has the power of dissolving bits of 
coagulated albumen, cartilage, or meat, with even greater 
readiness than that of Drosera. 
Mr. Darwin next records various observations and experiments 
upon more ordinary glandular hairs of several plants. 
To certain Saxifrages his attention was naturally called, on 
account of the presumed relationship of Droseracem to this 
genus. He declares that " their glands absorb matter from 
an infusion of raw meat, from solutions of nitrate and carbonate 
of ammonia, and apparently from decayed insects." To 
such plants the vast number of little insects caught may not 
be useless, as they may be to many other plants (Tobacco, 
for instance) with sticky glands, in which Mr. Darwin could 
detect no power of absorption. The prevalent idea, that 
glandular hairs in general serve merely as secreting or excretion 
organs, and are of small or no account to the plant, must 
now be reconsidered. Those of the common Chinese Primrose 
{Primida Sinensis), although indifferent to animal infusions, 
were found to absorb quickly both the solution and vapor of 
carbonate of ammonia. Now, as rain-water contains a small 
percentage of ammonia, and the atmosphere a minute quantity 
of the carbonate or nitrate, and as a moderate-sized plant 
of this Primrose was ascertained (by estimate from a count 
on small measured surfaces by Mr. Francis Darwin) to bear 
between 2- 1 to 3 millions of these glands, it begins to dawn 
upon us that these multitudinous organs are neither mere 
excrescences nor outlets, nor in any just sense insignificant. 
Mr. Darwin next investigates the densely crowded short 
glandular hairs, with their secretions, which form the buttery 
surface of the face of the leaves of Pinguicula, the Butterwort. 
He finds that the leaves of the common Butterwort 
have great numbers of small insects adhering to them, as also 
grains of pollen, small seeds, etc. ; that most substances so 
lodged or placed, if yielding soluble matter to the glands, 
excite them to increased secretion ; but that if non-nitrogenous 
the viscid fluid poured out is not at all acid, while if nitrogenous 
it invariably has an acid reaction and is more copious ; 
that in this state it will quickly dissolve the muscles of insects, 
meat, cartilage, fibrin, curds of milk, etc. ; that when tho 
surface of a plane leaf is fed, by placing upon it a row of 
flies alone one margin, this margin, but not the other, folds 
over within twenty hours to envelop them ; and when placed 
on a medial line, a little below the apex, both margins incurve. 
He concludes " that Pinguicula vulgaris, with its small roots, 
is not only supported to a large extent by the extraordinary 
number of insects which it habitually captures, but likewise 
draws some nourishment from the pollen, leaves, and seeds of 
other plants, which often adhere to its leaves. It is therefore 
partly a vegetable as well as an animal feeder." The leaves 
in one or two other species were found capable of greater and 
more enduring inflection, and the glands excitable to increased 
secretion even by bodies not yielding soluble nitrogenous 
matter. 
The aquatic type of this family is Utricularia ; and the 
bladder-bearing species of this genus are to Binguicula nearly 
what Aldrovanda is to Dionaea and Drosera — the bladders 
imprisoning minute aquatic animals by a mechanism almost 
as ingenious as that of Dionaea itself. Observations of the 
same kind were made in this country by Mrs. Treat, of Vineland, 
New Jersey, before Mr. Darwin's investigations were 
made known. These submerged aquatic stomachs, ever deluged 
with water, apparently do not really digest their captures, 
but merely absorb the products of their decay. 
The same must in all probability be said of such Pitcherplants 
as Sarracenia and Darlingtonia, which Mr. Darwin 
merely alludes to at the close of his volume but does not treat 
of. Nepenthes, however, according to Dr. Hooker's investigations, 
has attained a higher dignity, and converted its pitcher 
into a stomach. This parallelism, and this higher and lower 
mode of appropriating organic products by each of the three 
well-marked carnivorous families of plants, are highly suggestive. 

In concluding this notice of a book for which we have no 
room to do justice, — but which is sure to be in the hands of 
many interested readers, — there is something to be said in 
regard to the discovery of the lure in some of our Sarracenias. 
We have by degrees to discover our discoverers. In this 
Journal, only so far back as the number for August, 1873, is 
a notice of the discovery of a sweet secretion at the orifice of 
the pitcher of Sarracenia flava, by Mr. B. F. Grady, of Clinton, 
North Carolina (in the article by an oversight called 
" Mr. Hill "), which effectively lures flies to their destruction. 
This statement, made. in a letter, had been for several months 
in our hands, awaiting the opportunity of confirmation, when 
an allusion to the same thing appeared in the English edition 
of LeMaout and Decaisne's System of Botany, without reference 
to any source, and on inquiry we learned that the authority 
for the statement was forgotten. But early in the following 
year, when the monograph of the order appeared in the 
last volume of De Candolle's " Brodromus," a reference was 
found to a paper by Dr. Macbride in the Transactions of the 
Linnaean Society. His observations (made upon S. variolaris), 
it appears, were communicated to Sir J. E. Smith, 
read before the Linnaean Society in 1815, and published soon 
after. They are referred to by his surviving friend and 
associate, Eliott, in his well-known work, and therefore need 
not have gone to oblivion, or needed rediscovery here in our 
days by Mr. Grady and Dr. Mellichamp, the latter greatly 
extending our knowledge of the subject. Brobably the main 
facts were all along popularly known in the regions these 
species affect, and where their use as fly-traps is almost immemorial. 
But the gist of these remarks is, that a colleague 
has just called our attention to an earlier publication than 
that of Dr. Macbride, namely, an article on " Certain Vegetable 
Muscicapae," by Benjamin Smith Barton (one of our 
botanical fathers), published in " Tilloch's Philosophical 
Magazine " for June, 1812. Among other matters not bearing 
directly upon this point, he says of Sarracenia, without 
reference to any particular species : " A honeyed fluid is 
secreted or deposited on the inner surface of the hollow leaves, 
near their faux or opening ; and this fluid allures great numbers 
of the insects which they are found to contain into the 
ascidia." 
Here is earlier publication by three years. Yet we suspect 
that Dr. Barton knew little about it at first hand, and we find 
clear evidence that he had not anticipated Dr. Macbride. All 
his references have an indefiniteness quite in contrast with 
Dr. Macbride' s narrative ; he says that " some if not all the 
species of the genus appear to possess a kind of glandular 
function," without mentioning those that have it, or the 
absence of it in the only species growing around him at the 
north ; and he adds that he " was entirely unacquainted with 
this curious economy . . . when I published the first edition 
of my ' Elements of Botany,' and even when I printed the 
appendix (in vol. i.) to the second edition of this work." Now 
his paper is dated September 11, 1811 ; and the volume 
referred to, as just printed, is dated 1812. But Macbride 
states that his observations were chiefly made 1810 and 1811 ; 
he corresponded intimately with Eliott, through whom, if not 
directly, his observations would probably find their way at 
once to the Bhiladelphia naturalists. 
NAUDIN ON THE NATURE OF HEREDITY AND 
VARIABILITY IN PLANTS. 
Why is it the nature and essence of species to breed true, 
and why do species sometimes vary ? In other words, why is 
offspring like parent, and when unlike in certain particulars, 
what is the cause and origin of the difference ? We commonly 
and properly enough take these two associated yet 
opposed facts as first principles. But it is equally proper and 
legitimate to enquire after the cause of them. 
M. Naudin, a good many years ago, took up the study of 
hybrid plants, and followed up for a series of generations, 
the course of life of certain self-fertile ones, notably of Datura. 
We gave at the time an abstract of his observations of the 
manner in which the characters of two closely related common 
species, PD. Stramonium and D. Tatida, were mixed, and in 
which the characters of the two began to separate in the closebred 
progeny of the next generation, ending in a complete 
division of the amalgamated forms into those of the two constituent 
species after a few generations. 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser. , xi. 153. 
The " Comptes Bendus " of September 27 and October 
4, 1875, contain an abstract of a paper communicated by M. 
Naudin to the French Academie des Sciences, of which the 
text was suggested by a hybrid between the wild Bactuca 
virosa and a variety of B. sativa, the common Lettuce. The 
hybrid was an accidental one : its seeds were fully fertile ; 
a great number of young plants were raised from them, of 
which twenty were preserved for full development and study. 
Like other hybrids the original showed no character which 
was not evidently derived from the two parents; and, fertilized 
by its own pollen, the offspring all agreed in this 
respect, although they varied exceedingly among themselves 
in the division of the parental heritage, no two being quite 
alike. This exceeding vacillation between the two parental 
forms, but not overpassing the limits on either hand, — which 
Naudin finds to be the common characteristic of fertile 
hybrids, close-bred, — he names disordered variation {variation 
desordonnee). His explanation is that the hybrid is a piece 
of living mosaic, that two specific natures are at strife in it ; 
in the progeny each endeavors to reclaim its own, like seeks 
like ; whence in the course of a very few generations (as he 
first showed in Datura) a segregation takes place, part of tho 
progeny reverting completely to one ancestral type, part to the 
other. What Naudin now insists upon is that out of all this 
disturbance comes nothing new ; that there is here no variation 
beyond the line of inheritance ; and therefore from crossing 
no possible development of species. 
To this proposition we accede, so far as respects the direct 
consequence of crossing. To fill up the interval more or less 
between two forms or species with intermediate patterns may 
tend to the fusion or confusion of the two, but not to the origination 
of new forms or species. Although Naudin's own 
experiments lead him to deny all tendency to variation overpassing 
these limits, we do not forget that his countryman, 
the late M. Vilmorin, — working in a different way and with 
another object, — arrived at a different conclusion. He succeeded, 
as we understand, in originating floricultural novelties 
from species which refused to vaxy per se, by making a cross, 
not to infuse the character of the male parent, for he fertilized 
the progeny with the pollen of the female parent, and 
thus early bred out the other blood, but to induce variation, 
which, once initiated in the internal disorder consequent upon 
the crossing, was apt to proceed, or might be led on by selection, 
to great lengths, according to Vilmorin. The variations 
in question, being mainly such as are sought in floriculture, 
may not have passed the line laid down by Naudin, or actually 
have introduced new features. But such plants would surely 
have no exemption from the ordinary liability to variation. 
If other plants vary, in the sense of producing something new, 
so may these. 
This brings us to another inference which Naudin draws. 
Having observed that his hybrids in their manifold variation 
exhibited nothing which was not derivable from their immediate 
ancestry, he directly (and in our opinion too confidently) 
concludes that all variation is atavism, — that when 
real variations are set up in ordinary species, this is not an 
origination but a reversion, a breaking out of some old ancestral 
character, a particular and long deferred instance of this 
variation desorclonnee, which would thus appear to be the 
only kind of variation. This view has been presented before, 
but not, perhaps, so broadly. Adducing some theoretical 
considerations in its favor — to which we may revert — and 
some sound reasons against the view that variation is caused 
by external influences, he declares it " infinitely more probable 
that variation of species properly so called is due to 
ancestral influences rather than to accidental actions." We 
might think so if these two categories were exhaustive, and 
external conditions must be supposed to act immediately, as 
the cause rather than the occasion of variation. But the supposition 
that " accidental actions," whatever they may be, and 
external influences of every sort do not produce but educe and 
conduct variation — which is our idea of what natural selection 
means — avoids the force of Naudin's arguments. 
Moreover, Naudin's view, regarded as an hypothesis for 
explaining variation, leaves the problem just where it finds it. 
To explain the occurrence of present and actual variations, 
hypothetical ones like those of a former time are assumed ; the 
present diversity implies not only equal but the very same 
anterior diversity, and so on backwards. Or rather it demands 
a much greater diversity at the outset than now ; for these 
aberrant forms are the rare exception, and if due to atavism 
they imply the loss of the many and the incidental reappearance 
of the few. Else they would be the rule instead of the 
exception, and atavism would be simply heredity. This comes 
to the view which Mr. Agassiz strongly maintained, that really 
there are no varieties, — meaning, we understand, that all the 
forms are aboriginal, except the transient ones evidently due 
to circumstances. 
That some variation is atavism is clear enough. This is 
the natural explanation of the appearance of characters wanting 
in the immediate parents but known in their ancestors 
or presumed ancestors. But the assumption of hypothetical 
ancestors to account for variation generally is quite another 
thing. Besides its inutility as an explanation, to which we 
have adverted, its improbability as an hypothesis is set in a 
strong light by Naudin's own forcible conception of the nature 
of heredity. What is heredity ? he asks. In other words, 
what keeps species so true, offspring like parent, through the 
long line of generations ? He illustrates hereditary force by 
comparing its action with that of physical force, in which the 
movement from one state of equilibrium to another is always 
that in which there is least resistance. From which it follows 
that when it has once begun to proceed in a certain course, its 
tendency to continue in that direction increases, because it 
facilitates its way as it overcomes obstacles. In other words, 
this line becomes fixed by habit ; vires acquirit eundo ; the 
stream deepens its bed by flowing ; and the more remote the 
commencement of a certain course, the more fixed its direction, 
and the greater its power of overcoming opposition. 
The species is kept true in its course by the sum of the heredities 
which press each individual forward in its actual direction. 
So that, as Naudin remarks, if we could calculate the 
energy with which millions of ancestors tend to impel the living 
representative of the line onward in the same direction, we 
should better apprehend the persistence of species, and feel 
the great improbability that the stream will ever escape from 
its ancient and well-worn bed, and strike into new courses. 
Now, in the first place, the more lively the conception we 
thus form of the invariability of species, through a happy 
metaphorical illustration of it, the more unlikely does it appear 
that early characters, long lost in the flow, should reappear 
through atavism as varieties. To continue the simile, the more 
impetuous the stream, the less the possibility of its turning 
back upon itself, and resuming old characteristics. The eddies 
of atavism (the resumption of dropped characters) are not 
likely to extend back very far ; and it seems gratuitous to 
have recourse to them in explanation of new forms. Moreover, 
although the stream has made its bed and lies in it, not 
escaping from its own valley, it is flexible enough to obstacles, 
is ever changing its particular course as it flows, and may by 
its own action send off here and there a bayou (variety) or 
branch into a delta of channels (derivative species). 
Like Agassiz, Naudin conceives of species as originating 
with a large number of individuals of the same structure, and 
of which numerous reciprocal crosses have determined the 
direction of the line in which their posterity have evolved. 
But he maintains that these individuals, and all existing species, 
had a common origin in a " proto-organism " ; and that 
the various lines of descent acquired fixity into species only 
as they acquired sexuality. If we rightly apprehend it, Naudin's 
idea of the purport of sexual reproduction (as contrasted 
with that by buds) is to give fixity to species. Our idea is 
a different one, both as to the essential meaning of sexuality 
and as to its operation in respect to fixity. His conception 
may be tested by inquiring which are the more variable, or 
sportive, seedlings or plants propagated from buds. This we 
suppose can be answered only one way. 
M. Naudin is a veteran and excellent investigator, and 
nothing which he writes is to be slighted. We have frankly 
set down our impressions upon a first perusal of his important 
communication ; but are ready to revise them, if need be, upon 
more deliberate consideration. 
CROSS AND SELF-FERTILIZATION IN THE VEGETABLE 
KINGDOM. 
Me. DARWIN, in the title of his new work, 1 refers only 
incidentally to adaptations for cross-fertilization, — a subject 
which has given origin to a copious literature since he opened 
it anew in his book on the Fertilization of Orchids, in 1862. 
A new edition of this latter book is on the eve of publication 
in England, and we believe that this author's scattered papers 
on cross-fertilization, as secured by various contrivances, are 
about to be collected, revised, and published in book form. 
In the volume now before us, Mr. Darwin deals with the 
effects of cross and self-fertilization, recounts at length the 
experiments he has devised and carried on, collects and criticises 
the results, glances at the means of fertilization, and the 
habits of insects in relation to it, and ends with some theoretical 
considerations of inferences suggested by or deduced from 
the facts which have been brought to light. 
If writing for the popular press, we should be bound to say 
that the book is not light reading. Three fourths of its pages 
and of the chapters are devoted to the details of the experiments 
and the sifting and the various presentation of the 
results ; and the remainder, although abounding in curious 
facts and acute suggestions, is yet of a solid character. The 
bearings of various points upon what is called " Darwinism " 
are merely touched or suggested, here and there, in a manner 
more likely to engage the attention of the thoughtful scientific 
than of the general reader. 
That cross-fertilization is largely but not exclusively aimed 
at in the vegetable kingdom, is abundantly evident. As Mr. 
Darwin declares, "it is unmistakably plain that innumerable 
flowers are adapted for cross-fertilization, as that the teeth 
and talons of a carnivorous animal are adapted for catching 
prey, or that the plumes, hooks, and wings of a seed are adapted 
1 The Effects of Cross and Self -Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom. 
By Charles Darwin. London and New York, 1876. (American Journal 
of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xiii. 125.) 
for its dissemination." That the crossing is beneficial, and 
consequently the want of it injurious, is a teleological inference 
from the prevalence of the arrangements which promote 
or secure it, — an inference the value of which increases with 
the number, the variety, and the effectiveness of the arrangements 
for which no other explanation is forthcoming. That 
the good consisted in a re-invigoration of progeny, or the evil 
of close-breeding in a deterioration of vigor, was the suggestion 
first made (so far as we know), or first made prominent, 
by Knight, from whom Darwin adopted it. However it be as 
to animads, there was until now no clear and direct evidence 
that cross-fertilization in the vegetable kingdom did re-invigorate. 
Indeed, the contrary might be inferred from the long 
and seemingly indefinite perpetuation of bud-propagating 
varieties, which have no fertilization at all. But the inference 
from this is not as cogent as would at first appear. For, 
although bud-propagation is, we think, to be considered as the 
extreme of close-breeding, yet in it the amount of material 
contributed by parent to offspring is usually vastly more than 
in sexual reproduction ; and, accordingly, the diminution to 
an injurious degree of any inherited quality or essence might 
be correspondingly remote. Yet, as sexual reproduction may 
be and often must be much closer in plants than it can be in 
most animals, the ill effects of self-fertilization, or the good 
of cross-fertilization, might the sooner be noticeable. Mr. 
Darwin arranged a course of experiments to test this question, 
prosecuted it as to some species for eleven years ; and the main 
object of this volume is to set forth the results. 
Tpomma purpurea, the common Morning Glory of our 
gardens, was the leading subject. The flowers of this species 
self-fertilize, but must also be habitually cross-fertilized, as 
they are visited freely by bumble-bees and other insects. Ten 
flowers of a plant in a green-house were fertilized with their 
own pollen ; ten others were crossed with pollen from a different 
plant. The seeds from both were gathered, allowed to 
germinate on damp sand, and as often as pairs germinated at 
the same time the two were planted on opposite sides of the 
same pot, the soil in which was well mixed, so as to be uniform 
in composition. " The plants on the two sides were always 
watered at the same time and as equally as possible, and even 
if this had not been done the water would have spread almost 
equally to both sides, as the pots were not large. The crossed 
and self-fertilized plants were separated by a superficial partition, 
which was always kept directed towards the chief 
source of light, so that the plants on both sides were equally 
illuminated." Five pairs were thus planted in two pots, and 
all the remaining seeds, whether or not in a state of germination, 
were planted on the opposite sides of a third pot, so that 
the plants were crowded and exposed to a very severe competition. 
Bods of equal diameter were given to all the plants 
to twine up, and as soon as one of each pair had reached the 
summit, both were measured. But a single rod was furnished 
to each side of the crowded pot, and only the tallest plant on 
each side was measured. This was followed up for ten generations 
; the close-fertilization being always self-fertilization, 
i. c, by pollen to stigma of the same flower; the crossing, 
between individuals in successive generations of this same 
stock, except in special instances, when an extraneous stock 
was used as one parent, —to eminent advantage, as will be 
seen. 
The difference in vigor between the cross-bred and the 
close-bred progeny, as measured by early growth, was well 
marked throughout. In the mean of the ten generations it 
was as 100 to 77. In the tenth generation it was 100 to 54, 
that is, five cross-bred plants grew to the average height of 
93.7 inches while the close-bred were reaching the average 
of 50.4 inches. This was a notably greater difference than 
in any previous generation. But this was probably accidental 
or anomalous, for it was not led up to by successive steps. 
Indeed, the difference in the first generation was a trifle 
greater than the average of all ten, being as 100 to 76. The 
second generation was as 100 to 79 ; the third as 100 to 68 ; 
the fourth as 100 to 86 ; the fifth as 100 to 75 ; the sixth as 
100 to 72 ; the seventh as 100 to 81 ; the eighth as 100 to 
85 ; the ninth as 100 to 79 ; the tenth as already stated, 100 
to 54. The general result is made striking in the following 
illustration. 
" If all the men in the country were on an average six 
feet high, and there were some families which had been long 
and closely interbred, these would be almost dwarfs, their 
average height during ten generations being only four feet 
eight and one-quarter inches." (p. 53.) 
It is remarkable that the difference between the close-bred 
and the cross-bred individuals should have been as great as 
it was in the first generation ; and, this being the case, it 
might have been expected that the difference would have 
gone on increasing in the succeeding generations. If selffertilization 
is injurious, the ill effects would be expected to 
be cumulative. " But," instead of this, " the difference between 
the two sets of plants in the seventh, eighth, and ninth 
generations taken together is less than in the first and second 
generations together." Upon this Mr. Darwin remarks : 
" When, however, we remember that the self-fertilized and 
crossed plants are all descended from the same mother plant, 
that many of the crossed plants in each generation were related, 
often closely related, and that all were exposed to the 
same conditions, which, as we shall hereafter find, is a very 
important circumstance, it is not at all surprising that the 
difference between them should have somewhat decreased in 
the later generations." (p. 56.) 
Further light was thrown upon these points by two kinds 
of subsidiary experiments. In one case, the cross was made 
between two flowers of the same plant of Ipomaea, while 
other flowers were self-fertilized as before. On raising seedlings 
from the two lots, it was found that such crossing gave 
no superiority; indeed, the offspring of the self-fertilized 
flowers appeared to be rather more vigorous than the closecrossed. 
And other experiments led to the same conclusion, 
namely, that there was no particular benefit from cross-fertilization 
on the same plant. In the other case, the cross 
was made not only between the flowers of distinct plants, but 
between those from different sources, and which had presumably 
grown under somewhat different conditions. For 
instance, several flowers of the ninth generation of crossed 
plants of Ipomaea were crossed with pollen taken from the 
same variety but from a distant garden. The resulting seedlings 
showed the benefit of the fresh stock remarkably, being 
as much superior in vigor to those of the tenth intercrossed 
generation as the latter were to the self -fertilized plants of a 
corresponding generation. In height they were as 100 to 78, 
over the ordinary intercrossed; and in fertility, as 100 to 
51. Indeed, Mr. Darwin's main conclusion from all his 
observations is, " that the mere act of crossing by itself does 
no good. The good depends on the individuals which are 
crossed differing slightly in constitution, owing to their progenitors 
having been subjected during several generations to 
slightly different conditions, or to what we call in our ignorance 
spontaneous variation." 
The greater constitutional vigor of the crossed plants of 
Ipomaea was manifested in other ways than, their rate or 
amount of growth : they better endured exposure to a low 
temperature or sudden changes of temperature ; they blossomed 
earlier ; and they were more fertile. The difference 
in fertility varied greatly in degree (the extremes in different 
experiments and in different generations being 100 to 
99 and 100 to 26), but was always sustained. Also, "the 
impaired fertility of the self-fertilized plants was shown in 
another way, namely, by their anthers being smaller than 
those in the flowers on the crossed plants. This was first 
observed in the seventh generation, but may have occurred 
earlier. . . . The quantity of pollen contained in one of the 
self-fertilized was, as far as could be judged by the eye, about 
half of that contained in one from a crossed plant. The impaired 
fertility of the self-fertilized plants of the eighth generation 
was also shown in another manner, which may often 
be observed in hybrids — namely, by the first-formed flowers 
being sterile." 
Similar experiments were made, but not carried to the 
same extent, upon fifty-seven other species of plants, belonging 
to fifty-two genera, and to thirty great natural families, 
the species being natives of all parts of the world. The results 
— the details and discussion of which occupy the bulk of 
this volume — vary greatly, some plants making a better and 
others a less good showing for the advantage of cross-fertilization, 
and this advantage manifesting itself in different 
ways, some in vigor or amount of growth, some in hardiness, 
most in fertility ; but with twelve cases in which the crossed 
plants showed no marked advantage over the self-fertilized. 
There were, however, fifty-seven cases in which the crossed 
exceeded the self-fertilized by at least five per cent., generally 
by much more. 
Increase of vigor, as evinced in growth, appears generally 
to be accompanied by increased fertility ; but sometimes the 
good of crossing was manifested only in productiveness, i. e., 
in a larger amount of seed. This proved to be the case in 
Eschscholtzia, in which — strange to say — self -fertilized plants 
of several generations were superior in size and weight to 
intercrossed plants, even when the crossing was between 
flowers derived on one side from American, on the other 
from English seed, from which, upon Mr. Darwin's view, the 
maximum benefit should be gained. This instance, however, 
stands alone. Yet it is approached by several others, in a 
manner which might have negatived the general conclusions 
of the research, if they had been hastily gathered from a 
small number of trials. 
For example, in the sixth self-fertilized generation of Ipomma 
purpurea, one of these plants took the lead of its competitor, 
kept it almost to the end, and was ultimately overtopped 
only by half an inch on a total height of several feet. 
To ascertain whether this exceptionally vigorous plant would 
transmit its power to its seedlings, several of its flowers were 
fertilized with their own pollen, and the seedlings thus raised 
were put into competition with ordinary self-fertilized and 
with intercrossed plants of the corresponding generation. 
The six children of Hero (the name by which this individual 
was designated) beat the ordinary self-fertilized competitors 
at the rate of 100 to 84, and the intercrossed competitors at 
the rate of 100 to 95 ; and in the next generation the selffertilized 
grandchildren beat those from a cross between two 
of the children at the rate of 100 to 94. In the next generations 
the seedlings were raised in winter in a hot-house, became 
unhealthy, and the experiment terminated without marked 
result. Moreover, the remarkable vigor of growth in Hero 
and its progeny was attended by somewhat increased fertility. 
Here, then, an idiosyncrasy arose from some utterly unknown 
cause, — a spontaneous variation of constitution, which 
was transmitted to posterity, and which gave all the benefit 
of cross-fertilization, and somewhat more, both as to vigor 
and fertility. A similar idiosyncrasy made its appearance in 
the third generation of seedlings of Mimulus luteus. 
Discordant or anomalous facts like these seem confusing, 
even though too few to affect seriously the grand result of 
the numerous experiments ; but upon Darwinian principles, 
in which adaptations are ultimate results, they are to be expected, 
as a consequence of the general and apparently vague 
proclivity to vary. 
In Foxglove, — the flowers of which are naturally self-sterile 
or nearly so, and in which crossing gave a marked advantage 
over self -fertilizing, both as to growth and productiveness, — 
a decided, though small advantage appeared to come from 
the crossing of flowers on the same plant. 
In Origanum vidgare, crosses were made between different 
plants of a large clump, long cultivated in a kitchen-garden, 
which had evidently spread from a single root by stolons, and 
which had become in a good degree sterile, as is usual under 
such conditions. The crossing caused rather more seed to 
form ; but the seedlings from the crossed did not surpass in 
growth those of the self-fertilized ; " a cross of this kind did 
no more good than crossing two flowers on the same plant of 
Ipomaea or Mimulus. Turned into the open ground, and both 
self and cross-fertilized the following summer, and equal pairs 
of the resulting seeds planted on opposite sides of two very 
large pots, the crossed plants from seed showed a clear superiority 
over their self-fertilized brethren, at the rate of 100 
to 86. But this excess of height by no means gives a fair 
idea of the vast superiority in vigor of the crossed over the 
self-fertilized plants. The crossed flowered first and produced 
thirty flower-stems, while the self-fertilized produced only 
fifteen, or half the number. The pots were then bedded out, 
and the roots probably came out of the holes at the bottom, 
and thus aided their growth. Early in the following summer, 
the superiority of the crossed plants, owing to their increase 
by stolons, over the self-fertilized plants, was truly wonderful. 
. . . Both the crossed and the self-fertilized plants 
being left freely exposed to the visits of bees, manifestly 
produced much more seed than their grandparents, — the 
plants of original clumps still growing close by in the same 
garden, and equally left to the action of bees." 
These few cases must here suffice, and they give a fair general 
idea of the main results reached, — somewhat qualified, 
however, by certain instances in which little or no benefit 
was observed. Let it be remarked that while most of the 
cases show decided and unequivocal good from the crossing, 
none of them unequivocally tell to the contrary, as the advantage 
appears sometimes in one direction, sometimes in 
another. "Thus, the crossed and self - fertilized plants of 
Ipomsea, Papaver, Reseda odorata, and Limnanthes were 
almost equally fertile, yet the former exceeded considerably 
in height the self -fertilized plants. On the other hand, the 
crossed and self-fertilized plants of Mimulus and Primula 
differed in am extreme degree in fertility, but by no means to 
a corresponding degree in height or vigor." 
We must wholly omit — among many other things — the 
interesting account of self-sterile plants, meaning here not 
those in which the pollen does not reach the stigma unaided, 
but those in which it is impotent, or nearly so, when applied, 
although efficient upon the stigma of another individual. 
Verbascum, Passiflora, Corydalis, and many Orchids afford 
instances of this sort. In these, the advantage of cross-fertilization 
arises to a necessity. A noteworthy fact respecting 
them (of which Mr. Darwin makes much) is, that such 
self-sterility, or the reverse, is influenced by slight changes 
in the conditions, such as difference in temperature, grafting 
on another stock, and the like. In South Brazil, Fritz Midler 
found that for six generations all his plants of Eschscholtzia 
Calif ornica were completely sterile, unless supplied with 
pollen from a distinct plant, when they wore completely fer- 
tile. This was not the case in English plants, which, when 
covered by a net, set a considerable number of capsules, the 
seeds of which, by weight, were as 71 to 100 of those on 
plants intercrossed by bees. These Brazilian seeds, sent to 
England, yielded plants with moderately self-fertile flowers, 
and this limited self-fertility was increased in two generations 
of English growth. Conversely, seeds from English plants 
grown in Brazil were more self-fertile than those reared in 
Brazil for several generations ; yet " one which did not flower 
the first year, and was thus exjiosed for two seasons to the 
climate of Brazil, proved quite self -sterile, like a Brazilian 
plant, showing how quickly the climate had acted on its sexual 
constitution." Having observed that certain individuals of 
Mignonette were self-sterile, Mr. Darwin secured several such 
plants under separate nets, and by intercrossing these for a 
few generations, obtained plants which inherited this peculiarity, 
so that " without doubt a self -sterile race of Mignonette 
could easily have been established." 
Nine of the twelve chapters are devoted strictly to the effects 
of cross and self-fertilization. The tenth considers the " means 
of fertilization." Cross-fertilization is favored or ensured by: 
1, the separation of the sexes ; 2, the maturity of the male 
and female sexual elements at different periods; 3, dimorphism, 
or even trimorphism ; 4, various mechanical contrivances 
; 5, the more or less complete inefficiency of the flower's 
own pollen on its stigma, and the prepotency of pollen from 
any other individual over that from the same plant. We 
understand that Mr. Darwin is just now occupied in revising 
and extending his various papers upon these topics, with a 
view to their publication in a volume. Here he gives a list of 
plants which, when insects are excluded, are either quite sterile 
or produce less than half the number of seeds yielded by 
unprotected plants. This is followed by a list of plants which, 
when protected from insects, are either quite fertile or yield 
more than half the number of seeds produced by unprotected 
plants. 
" Each of these lists contains by a mere accident the same 
number of genera, namely, forty-nine. The genera in the first 
list include sixty-five species, and those in the second sixty 
species ; the Orchidem in both being excluded. If the genera 
in this latter order, as well as in the Asclepiadem and Apocynacem., 
had been included, the number of species which are 
sterile if insects are excluded would have been greatly increased 
; but the lists are confined to species which were actually 
experimented upon. The results can be considered as 
only approximately accurate, for fertility is so variable a 
character, that each species ought to have been tried many 
times. The above number of species, namely, 125, is as 
nothing to the hosts of living plants ; but the mere fact of 
more than half of them being sterile within the specified 
degree, when insects are excluded, is a striking one ; for 
whenever pollen has to be carried from the anthers to the 
stigma in order to insure full fertility, there is at least a good 
chance of cross-fertilization. I do not, however, believe that 
if all known plants were tried in the same manner, half would 
be found to be sterile within the specified limits ; for many 
flowers were selected for experiment which presented some 
remarkable structure ; and such flowers often require insectaid." 
— (p. 370.) 
It is worth noticing that Trifolium repens and T. pratense 
(the common White and Bed Clovers) have a place in the first 
list ; T. arvense and T. procxtmbens in the second. Darwin 
refers to Mr. Miner's statement that "in the United States 
hive-bees never suck the Bed Clover," and says it is the same 
in England, except from the outside through holes bitten by 
humble-bees ; yet that IE Midler has seen them visiting this 
plant in Germany for the sake both of pollen and nectar, 
which latter they obtained by breaking apart the petals. 
Darwin has not qualified his statement, long ago made, of the 
complete sterility of Bed Clover protected from insects ; but 
Mr. Meehan asserts that protected plants are fertile in this 
country, without, however, giving details or the rate of fertility. 
In T. arvense, " the excessively small flowers are incessantly 
visited by hive and humble-bees ; when insects were 
excluded the flower-heads seem to produce as many and as 
fine seeds as the exposed heads." 
As to cross-fertilization, "the most important of all the 
means by which the pollen is carried from the anthers to the 
stigma of the same flower, or from flower to flower, are insects, 
belonging to the orders of Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera, 
and Diptera ; and in some parts of the world, birds." In a 
note the author cites all the cases known to him of birds fertilizing 
flowers. These are chiefly humming-birds. "In North 
America they are said to frequent the flowers of Impatiens " 
(for which Gould, " Trochilidae," is referred to as authority, 
and a reference is given to the " Gardener's Chronicle," which 
we find relates to something else in South America) ; and this 
is all concerning the United States. Can it be that there are 
no references in print to the most familiar fact that our humming-bird 
is very fond of sucking the blossoms of Trumpet 
Creeper ( Tecoma radicans) and of Honeysuckles ? Both 
these are, in size and arrangement of parts, well adapted to 
be thus cross-fertilized. 
Flowers are rendered conspicuous to birds and still more to 
insects, by bright colors. And as " almost every fruit which 
is devoured by birds presents a strong contrast in color with 
the green foliage, in order that it may be seen and its seeds 
disseminated," so the proportionally large size and the bright 
colors of the corolla, or, in some cases, the equally bright hues 
of the adjoining parts of the flower, or of the inflorescence, 
are correlated to visiting insects, — have come to pass, as Darwin 
would say, in consequence of the visits of insects, through 
the advantages in vigor and productiveness gained by crossfertilization. 
He is ready to adopt even the idea of Conrad 
Sprengel, which seemed to be so fanciful, that marks and 
streaks on the corolla serve as guides to the nectary; for, 
although insects are well able to discover the nectar without 
the aid of guiding marks, yet they are of service by facilitating 
the search and enabling insects to suck a greater number of 
blossoms within a given time, which is tantamount to greater 
opportunity for cross-fertilization. 
That odors attract insects is certain, and many flowers are 
both conspicuous and odoriferous, while others make up in 
fragrance what they lack in show. " Nageli affixed artificial 
flowers to branches, scenting some with essential oils, and 
leaving others unscented ; and the insects were attracted to 
the former in an unmistakable manner." 
"Of all colors white is the prevailing one ; and of white 
flowers a considerably larger proportion smell sweetly than of 
any other color, namely, 14.6 per cent. ; of red, only 8.2 per 
cent, are odoriferous. The fact of a larger proportion of white 
flowers smelling sweetly may depend in part on those which are 
fertilized by moths requiring the double aid of conspicuousness 
in the clusk and of odor. So great is the economy of 
nature, that most flowers which are fertilized by crepuscular 
or nocturnal insects emit their odor chiefly or exclusively in 
the evening. Some flowers, however, which are highly odoriferous 
depend solely on this quality for their fertilization, 
such as the night flowering-stock (Hesperis) and some species 
of Daphne ; and these present the rare case of flowers which 
are fertilized by insects being obscurely colored." 
" The shape of the nectary and of the adjoining parts are 
likewise related to the particular kinds of insects which habitually 
visit the flowers : this has been well shown by H. Midler, 
by his comparison of lowland species, which are chiefly visited 
by bees, with alpine species belonging to the same genera, 
which are visited by butterflies." 
"Pollen contains much nitrogen and phosphorus, — the two 
most precious of all the elements for the growth of plants, — 
but in the case of most open flowers, a large quantity of pollen 
is consumed by pollen-devouring insects, and a large quantity 
is destroyed during long-continued rain. With many plants 
this latter evil is guarded against, as far as possible, by the 
anthers opening only during dry weather, by the position and 
form of some or all of the petals, by the presence of hairs, 
etc. ; adso, as Kerner has shown in his interesting essay, by 
the movements of the petals or of the whole flower during 
cold and wet weather. In order to compensate the loss of 
pollen in so many ways, the anthers produce a far larger 
amount than is necessary for the fertilization of the same 
flower. I know this from my own experiments on Ipomaea, 
given in the Introduction ; and it is still more plainly shown 
by the astonishingly small quantity produced by cleistogene 
flowers, which lose none of their pollen, in comparison with 
that produced by the open flowers borne by the same plants ; 
and yet this small quantity suffices for the fertilization of all 
their numerous seeds. Mr. Hussall took pains in estimating 
the number of pollen-grains produced by a flower of the Dandelion, 
and found the number to be 243,600, and in a Peony 
3,654,000 grains. The editor of the ' Botanical Eegister ' 
counted the ovules in the flowers of Wistaria sinensis, and 
carefully estimated the number of pollen-grains, and he found 
that for each ovule there were 7,000 grains." — (pp. 376, 377.) 
These are probably fair averages of the numerical ratio 
of pollen to ovules in flowers which are adapted to be fertilized 
by insect agency. Their meaning in the " economy of 
nature " is seen by a comparison on the one hand with anemophilous, 
i. e. wind-fertilized, flowers, in most of which there 
is a vastly greater disproportion between the numbers, — compensating 
for inevitable waste, — and on the other hand with 
cleistogenous flowers, namely, those small and less developed 
blossoms which some plants produce in addition to the ordinary 
sort, and which fertilize as it were in the bud, necessarily 
by their own pollen. Here is no waste, and accordingly the 
anthers are very small, and the pollen-grains are not many times 
more than the ovules : also such flowers are never brightly 
colored, never odoriferous, and they never secrete nectar. 
The only advantages of this close-fertilization which we 
can think of are sureness and strict likeness ; both of which 
are quite as well secured by budding-reproduction. Now, as 
cleistogene flowers are borne, we believe, chiefly and perhaps 
only, by species whose normal blossoms are adapted for insectfertilization, 
they must be regarded as a subsidiary arrangement, 
a safeguard against failure of proper insect-visitation. 
As the volume . before us amply shows, this failure is in general, 
provided for by a more or less wide margin of self-fertilization 
in the very flowers which are adapted for crossing. In 
Impatiens, Viola, and the like, it is provided for by separate 
flowers, the special adaptations of which are unmistakable. 
H. Midler appears to have shown " that large and conspic- 
uous flowers are visited much more frequently and by many 
more kinds of insects than are small inconspicuous flowers. 
He further remarks that the flowers which are rarely visited 
must be capable of self-fertilization, otherwise they would 
quickly become extinct." Mr. Darwin's list seems to show 
that, as a rule, they are so ; yet many very small flowers, like 
those of Trifolium arvense, and small and dingy ones, like 
those of Asparagus, are freely visited by bees ; and, conversely, 
many large and conspicuous flowers which are frequented 
by insects are none the less self-fertilizable. Throughout 
we find that such things do not conform to arbitrary or 
fixed rules ; and this favors the idea that the differences have 
been acquired. Mr. Darwin conjectures that the self-fertilizing 
capabilities of many small and inconspicuous flowers may 
be comparatively recent acquisitions, on the ground that, if 
they were not occasionally intercrossed, and did not profit 
by the process, all their flowers would have become cleistogenous, 
" as they would thus have been largely benefited by 
having to produce only a small quantity of safely protected 
pollen." 
Mr. Darwin's experiments tending to prove that cross-fertilization 
between flowers on the same plant is of little or no 
use, he is naturally led to consider the means which favor or 
ensure their fertilization with pollen from a distinct plant. 
This must needs take place with dioecious plants, and is likely 
to occur with the monoecious, and is in some cases secured (as 
in Walnut and Hazelnut) by some trees being proterandrous 
and others proterogynous, so that they will reciprocally fertilize 
each other. In ordinary hermaphrodite species the expansion 
of only a few blossoms at a time greatly favors the 
intercrossing of distinct individuals, although in the case of 
small flowers it is attended with the disadvantage of rendering 
the plants less conspicuous to insects. Our common 
Sundews furnish a good illustration of this. They abound 
wherever they occur, and are for a long while in blossom, 
but each plant or spike opens but one flower at a time. The 
fact of bees visiting the flowers of the same species as long as 
they can, instead of promiscuously feeding from the various 
blossoms nearest within reach, greatly favors such intercrossin"-. 
So does the remarkable number of flowers which bees 
are able to visit in a short time (of which mention will be 
made), and the fact that they are unable to perceive without 
entering a flower whether other bees have exhausted the 
nectar. Then dichogamy (the maturation of one sex in a 
hermaphrodite flower earlier than the other) is so prevalent 
that it may almost be regarded as the rule ; and this ensures 
such crossing between few-flowered plants, and greatly favors 
it in the case of spikes, racemes, and the like. For, proterandry 
being the commonest arrangement, so that the younger 
flowers act as male, and the older as female, the bees habitually 
alighting at the bottom and proceeding upward, they 
carry the pollen from the upper and younger flowers to stigmas 
of the lower and older flowers of the next spike, and so 
on. Heterogonism, which is less common, operates precisely 
like complete dioecious separation of the sexes in this respect, 
and with the advantage that all the individuals are seed-bearing. 
Most of the special arrangements peculiar to certain 
families, such as Orchids, — or to plants, such as Posoqueria, 
with its wondrous mechanism for quickly stopping out access 
to the stigma when the pollen is violently discharged upon 
some insect, but opening the orifice the next day, — are of a 
kind to favor the crossing of distinct plants. Prepotency of 
other pollen, which may accompany the other arrangements 
or exist independently, acts largely and powerfully toward 
the same end. Our author investigates this at some length : 
we cite for illustration a single but strong case. The stigmas 
of a long-styled Cowslip were supplied with pollen from 
the same plant, and again after twenty-four hours, with pollen 
of a short-styled, dark-red Polyanthus, a variety of the 
same species : from the resulting seeds twenty seedlings were 
raised, and all of them bore reddish flowers; so that the 
effect of the plant's own pollen, though placed on the stigmas 
twenty-four hours previously, was destroyed by that of the 
red variety. The same thing is shown by the impossibility 
in many cases of raising two varieties of the same species 
pure if they grow near each other. "No one who has had any 
experience would expect to obtain pure cabbage-seed, for instance, 
if a plant of another variety grew within 200 or 300 
yards." And a veteran cultivator once had his whole stock 
of seeds seriously bastardized by some plants of purple Kale 
which flowered in a cottager's garden half a mile away. Mr. 
Gordon records a case of the crossing between Primroses and 
Cowslips through pollen carried by bees over more than two 
kilometers, or an English mile and a quarter. 
We must copy the close of this section — long though it 
be — because of its capital illustration of the topic in hand, 
and for the teleological lesson which it teaches. 
" The case of a great tree covered with innumerable hermaphrodite 
flowers, seems at first sight strongly opposed to 
the belief in the frequency of intercrosses between distinct 
individuals. The flowers which grow on the opposite sides 
of such a tree will have been exposed to somewhat different 
conditions, and a cross between them may perhaps be in some 
degree beneficial ; but it is not probable that it would be 
nearly so beneficial as a cross between flowers on distinct 
trees, as we may infer from the inefficiency of the pollen 
taken from plants which have been propagated from the same 
stock though growing on different roots. The number of bees 
which frequent certain kinds of trees when in full flower is 
very great, and they may be seen flying from tree to tree more 
frequently than might have been expected. Nevertheless, if 
we consider how numerous are the flowers, for instance, on 
a Ilorse-Chestnut or Lime-tree, an incomparably larger number 
of flowers must be fertilized by pollen brought from other 
flowers on the same tree, than from flowers on a distinct 
tree. But we should bear in mind that with the Horse-Chestnut, 
for instance, only one or two of the several flowers on the 
same peduncle produce a seed ; and that this seed is the product 
of only one out of the several ovules within the same 
ovarium. Now we know from the experiments of Herbert and 
others that if one flower is fertilized with pollen which is 
more efficient than that applied to the other flowers on the 
same peduncle, the latter often drop off ; and it is probable 
that this would occur with many of the self-fertilized flowers 
on a large tree, if other and adjoining flowers were crossfertilized. 
Of the flowers annually produced by a great 
tree, it is almost certain that a large number would be selffertilized 
; and if we assume that the tree produced only 
500 flowers, and that this number of seeds were requisite to 
keep up the stock, so that at least one seedling should hereafter 
struggle to maturity, then a large proportion of the 
seedlings would necessarily be derived from self-fertilized 
seeds. But if the tree annually produced 50,000 flowers, of 
which the self-fertilized dropped off without yielding seeds, 
then the cross-fertilized flowers might yield seeds in sufficient 
number to keep up the stock, and most of the seedlings would 
be vigorous from being the product of a cross between distinct 
individuals. In this manner the production of a vast 
number of flowers, besides serving to entice numerous insects 
and to compensate for the accidental destruction of many 
flowers by spring-frosts or otherwise, would be a very great 
advantage to the species ; and when we behold our orchardtrees 
covered with a white sheet of bloom in the spring, 
we should not falsely accuse Nature of wasteful expenditure, 
though comparatively little fruit is produced in the 
autumn." 
The Horse-Chestnut is not altogether a well-chosen example, 
for in it, as in our Buckeyes, a very large proportion 
of the flowers in the thyrsus are usually male, with barely a 
vestige of pistil. These serve, however, to increase the show, 
in the manner here illustrated, as well as to furnish abundance 
of pollen. 
The section on anemophilous (wind-fertilized) plants,— 
their interest as survivals of the earlier phaenogamic vegetation, 
the speculation as to how, when flying insects came to prevail, 
an anemophilous plant may have been rendered entomophilous,—-how 
pollen, being a most nutritious substance, would 
soon have been discovered and devoured by insects, and by 
adhering to their bodies be carried from anthers to stigma 
and from one flower to another, — how a waste secretion, such 
as honey-dew or glandular exudations, may have been developed 
into nectar and utilized as a lure, — the interesting illus- 
trations of the vast amount of pollen produced by anemophilous 
plants, and the great distances to which their light 
pollen is often carried by the wind, — all these inviting topics 
we must now pass by. 
In passing we note the remark that " the excretion of a 
sweet liquid by- glands seated outside of a flower is rarely 
utilized as a means of cross-fertilization by the aid of insects 
; " and the sole exception alluded to is that of the bracts 
of Marcgraviacem. But a parallel case is afforded by many 
species of Euphorbia, and notably in a striking species cultivated 
in conservatories, under the name of Boinsettia. Here 
the attraction to the eye is supplied by the intense red coloration 
of ordinary leaves placed next to the inflorescence, and 
that to the palate or tongue (if either term be allowed), by 
a large cup-shaped gland on the side of the involucre, which 
contains or surrounds the naked and greatly simplified flowers 
of both sexes. 
That anemophilous plants are prevailingly declinous (either 
monoecious or dioecious) is speculatively connected with their 
antiquity; that they are very largely trees or shrubs is 
because " the long life of a tree or bush permits of the separation 
of the sexes with much less risk of evil from impregnation 
occasionally failing, and seeds not being produced, than 
in the case of short-lived plants. Hence it is probably, as 
Lecoq has remarked, that annual plants are rarely dioecious." 
The number of anemophilous species is comparatively small, 
but that of individuals of the species strikingly large, so that 
they form of themselves, in cold and temperate regions, 
where plant-fertilizing insects are fewer, either vast forests, 
as of Coniferm, Birches, Beeches, etc., or meadows and glades, 
as of Grasses, Sedges, and Eushes. Being thus either necessarily 
or prevailingly cross-fertilizable and gregarious, it is 
not wonderful that they should hold their own unchanged in 
various parts of the world. Still their advantage is gained 
at the expense of the production of an enormous superfluity 
of pollen, a costly product ; and, when dioecious, half the individuals 
produce no seed. Hermaphroditism with dichogamy, 
or some equivalent, and transportation by an appeal 
to the senses and appetites of insects, secures all the advantages 
with least expenditure. The earliest fertilization in 
plants took place by the locomotion of the fertilizing or even 
of the fertilized material, in manner of most of the Algm : 
mainly losing this as vegetation became terrestrial, the transportation 
was committed to the winds, and finally in the 
higher plants more economicadly consigned to insects. 
The eleventh chapter, on the habits of insects in relation 
to the fertilization of flowers, is one of the interesting and 
readable although one of the shortest. It appears that the 
prince of naturalists, Aristotle, had observed more than two 
thousand years ago that the hive-bees visited the flowers of 
the same species as long as possible before going to a different 
species. This holds true of all kinds of bees and certain 
other insects, generally, but not absolutely; although, 
as Lubbock has recently proved, bees are much guided by 
color, yet they hold to the practice just mentioned in spite 
of difference in this respiect, being botanists enough to know 
that color is not a good specific character. Mr. Darwin has 
repeatedly seen humble-bees flying straight from a red Fraxinella 
to a white variety, from one Larkspur to a differentcolored 
variety ; and the same as to Primroses and Pansies. 
But two species of Poppy were by some bees treated as one ; 
and H. Midler traced hive-bees from blue Hyacinths to blue 
Violets. On the other hand, Darwin's bees fly straight from 
clump to clump of yellow Oenothera without turning an inch 
in their course to Eschscholtzias with yellow flowers which 
abound on either side. This constancy to species, however, is 
manifested only when their flowers abound ; a fact which may 
have led Mr. Darwin to his explanation of the reason of it. 
" The cause probably lies in insects being thus enabled to 
work quicker ; they have just learned how to stand in the 
best position on the flower, and how far and in what direction 
to insert their proboscides. They act on the same principle 
as does an artificer who has to make a half a dozen engines, 
and who saves time by making consecutively each wheel 
and part for all of them. Insects, or at least bees, seem 
much influenced by habit in all their manifold operations ; 
and we shall presently see that this holds good in their felonious 
practice of biting holes through the corolla." — (p. 420.) 
As to this latter practice — 
" The motive which impels bees to gnaw holes through the 
corolla seems to be the saving of time, for they lose much 
time in climbing into and out of large flowers, and in forcing 
their heads into closed ones. They were able to visit nearly 
twice as many flowers, as far as I could judge, of a Stachys 
and Pentstemon by alighting on the upper surface of the 
corolla and sucking through the cut holes, than by entering 
in the proper way. Nevertheless each bee before it has had 
much practice, must lose some time in making each new 
perforation, especially when the perforation must be made 
through both calyx and corolla. This action therefore implies 
foresight, of which faculty we have abundant evidence in 
their building operations ; and may we not further believe 
that some trace of their social instinct, that is, of working 
for the good of other members of the community, may here 
likewise play a part ? Many years ago I was struck with the 
fact that humble-bees as a general rule perforate flowers only 
when these grow in large numbers near together," etc., etc. 
(p. 433.) 
It appears that the cutting of these holes is done only by 
humble-bees, never by hive-bees. Yet the latter are quick to 
take advantage of them. 
" In the early part of the summer of 1857 I was led to 
observe during some weeks several rows of the scarlet Kidneybean 
{Phaseolus multiflorus), whilst attending the fertilization 
of this plant, and daily saw humble and hive-bees sucking 
at the mouths of the flowers. But one day I found several 
humble-bees employed in cutting holes in flower after 
flower ; and on the next day every single hive-bee, without 
exception, instead of alighting on the left wing petal and sucking 
the flower in the proper manner, flew straight without the 
least hesitation to the calyx, and sucked through the holes 
which had been made only the day before by the humble-bees, 
and they continued this habit for many following days. Mr. 
Belt has communicated to me (July 28, 1874) a similar case, 
with the sole difference that less than half of the flowers 
had been perforated by the humble-bees ; nevertheless all the 
hive-bees gave up sucking at the mouths of the flowers and 
visited exclusively the bitten ones. Now how did the hivebees 
find out so quickly that holes had been made ? Instinct 
seems to be out of the question as the plant is an exotic. 
The holes cannot be seen by bees whilst standing on the 
wing-petals, where they had always previously alighted. From 
the ease with which bees were deceived when the petals of 
Tobelia Erinus were cut off, it was clear that in this case 
they were not guided to the nectar by its smell ; and it may 
be doubted whether they were attracted to the holes in the 
flowers of the Bhaseolus by the odor emitted from them. 
Did they perceive the holes by the sense of touch in their 
proboscides, whilst sucking the flowers in the proper manner, 
and then reason that it would save them time to alight on the 
outside of the flower and use the holes ? This seems almost 
too abstruse an act of reason for bees ; and it is more probable 
that they saw the humble-bees at work, and understanding 
what they were about, imitated them and took advantage 
of the shorter path to the nectar. Even with animals high 
in the scale, such as monkeys, we should be surprised at hearing 
that all the individuals of one species within the space 
of twenty-four hours understood an act performed by a distinct 
species and profited by it." — (pp. 430, 431.) 
But we must cut short our citations and remarks ; passing 
by one of the most important points, relative to the amount 
of fertilizing work clone by insects, namely, the evidence of 
the extraordinary industry of bees and the number of flowers 
visited within a short time ; which, as well as the distance 
to which pollen is sometimes transported, is far greater than 
one would have supposed. But the volume is reprinting by 
the Appletons, and will soon be within the reach of all, — 
along with a new edition of the Orchid-fertilization book, the 
proper supplement to the present work, relating as it does to 
the class of plants in which the adaptation for fertilization by 
insects is carried to the highest degree of specialization and 
perfection. 
THE HYBRIDIZATION OF LILIES. 
Me. Parkman, under the above title, gives a summary 1 of 
his experiments, during ten or twelve years, in crossing Lilies. 
One of the earlier results, and that which the horticulturists 
count as the eminent one, was the production of that magnificent 
hybrid between B. auratum and B. speciosum, with 
flower resembling the former in fragrance and form and the 
most brilliant varieties of the latter in color, which was 
brought out in England under the name of Bilium Parhmanni. 
The interesting physiological point which Mr. Barkman 
here records is, that this striking novelty was wholly 
unique ; that all the other seeds of the same parentage which 
germinated, over fifty in number, gave rise to plants which in 
the blossom showed no trace of the male parent, B. auratum, 
but were exactly like the female parent, B. speciosum. That 
these plants were truly hybrids, notwithstanding, is well made 
out : 1, by the precautions taken against any possible access of 
own pollen ; 2, by the scantiness of seed, most of which was 
abortive ; 3. " such good seed as there was differed in appearance 
from the seed of the same Lily fertilized by the pollen of 
its own species," which is smooth, while this was rough and 
wrinkled ; and 4, the stems were mottled after the manner of 
the male parent. 
It would naturally be thought that this slight but evident 
impression of the character of the male parent might be 
deepened by iteration. That was tried next year, when the 
flowers of several of these plants were fertilized with the pollen 
of B. auratum precisely as their female parent had been fertilized. 
The result was an extremely scanty crop of seed, 
" but there was enough to produce Bor 10 young bulbs. Of 
these, when they bloomed, one bore a flower combining the 
features of both parents, but though large, it was far inferior 
to B. Parkmanni in form and color ; the remaining flowers 
1 The Hibridization of Lilies. By Francis Parkman, in Bull. Bussey Institution, 
ii., 1877. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xv. 
144.) 
were not distinguishable from those of the pure B. speciosumE 
The article records the results of various similar attempts to 
hybridize other Lilies. For instance, our B. superbum was 
pollenized with eight different old-world species. The result 
was, that capsules, apparently perfect, were abundantly produced 
; some of them contained nothing but chaff, others had 
a few imperfect seeds, still others gave a fair supply of good 
seed. From this seed several hundred young bulbs were produced. 
" But when these came into bloom, not a single flower 
of them all was in the least distinguishable from the pure 
B. superbum." Moreover, in this case (different from' the 
other) " not one of the eight different male parents had imposed 
his features on his hybrid offspring. Not only in their 
flowers, but in their leaves, stems, and bulbs, the young plants 
showed no variation from their maternal parent." The experiment 
proceeded one generation farther. "In the following 
year I set some of them apart from the rest, and applied to 
them, as to their mother before them, the pollen of several 
species of Lilies. This time the seeds were extremely scanty. 
A few, however, were produced ; but the plants and flowers 
that resulted from them were, to all appearance, T. superbum 
pure and simple." 
In trials of other species results intermediate between these 
two cases were obtained. For instance, the pure white of the 
perianth of B. longiforum came out unstained in the progeny 
raised by a crossing with L. speciosum, and the herbage was 
equally unaffected ; but in that or the next generation " distinct 
evidence could be seen of the action of alien pollen "^ in 
the changed color of many of the anthers, and in the abortion 
of others. They also showed differences of habit among themselves, 
some being very tall and vigorous, and others compact 
and bushy, with a tendency to bloom in clusters ; but these 
may have been mere seedling variations, with which the hybridization 
had nothing to do. Yet some of these marks correspond 
with known results of hybridization. 
That offspring should partake unequally of the characters 
of the two parents is a matter of common observation. That 
in the genus Lilium the hybrid offspring should in forty 
instances out of fifty take almost all its traits from the female 
parent, as Mr. Earkman has shown, is very remarkable. 
That, in not a few instances, it should take them all, so far 
as can be seen, — that the paternal influence should be represented 
by zero, —is most extraordinary. If parthenogenesis 
in plants were more unequivocally demonstrated, so as to be 
placed in certain instances quite beyond doubt (which is 
hardly the case), then we should regard the supposition which 
Mr. Earkman mentions as having been suggested to him, 
namely, that in the case of B. superbum the embryo was developed 
without male influence, to be quite as likely as the alternative 
of the progeny's inheriting everything from the female 
and nothing from the male parent ; in fact the two suppositions 
approximate to the same thing. We are supposing the total 
absence of male parent's characters, and also that the alternative 
of fertilization by chance pollen of the species is absolutely 
excluded. Of this there is very high probability, yet not 
entire certainty. One of Mr. Parkman's "reasons for believing 
that parthenogenesis had nothing to do with the cases 
in question," namely, that some of the Lilies were young plants 
that never had bloomed before, has no application, but comes 
from a slight confusion of the idea of parthenogenesis with 
the effect in some animals of a previous male influence upon 
next succeeding progeny, which is quite a different thing. 
The fact that more than one sort of hybrid may be generated 
between the same two species, copulated in the same 
way, must do away with the old mode of naming hybrids by a 
combination of the name of the two parents, that of the male 
preceding. The plan had the double advantage of indicating 
the origin of the cross, and of distinguishing hybrids from 
species in nomenclature ; but in practice it proves insufficient. 
PHYTOGAMY. 
If this name has not been coined already it ought to be. 
For " the loves of the plants," so mellifluously sung by Dr. 
Erasmus Darwin in the days of our grandfathers, have been 
in our time, through a felicitous atavism, more scientifically, if 
prosaically, expounded by his grandson, in a series of articles 
and volumes, of which the subjoined are the principal titles. 1 
If we have too long delayed our notice of these books, we 
make amends by calling attention to them at the season which 
invites and amply rewards the observations in field and garden 
which they suggest. Mainly in consequence of these writings, 
the subject which our new word connotes, namely, the connubial 
relations of plants, has become a popular and fruitful 
branch of biological science, which has its own laws and rules 
and technical terms, its distinction of legitimate and illegitimate 
unions, and tables of forbidden degrees. For example, 
it is not lawful, at least it is not en regie nor beneficial, for 
" thrum-eyed " Primroses to interbreed, nor for " pin-eyed " 
Primroses to interbreed. Such are illegitimate unions, seldom 
blessed with progeny. To the uncurious observer in Wordsworth's 
poem, — , 
"A primrose hy a river's brim 
A yellow primrose was to him, 
And it was nothing more." 
But as concerns the Primrose, where seed-bearing is in 
question, if it be one of the thrum-eyed stock, the pollen 
brought to it must come from the pin-eyed, and vice versa, in 
order to secure full fertility. Tiny blue-eyed Houstonias, enamelling 
our meadows in early spring, and fragrant Mitchellas, 
carpeting Pine-woods in midsummer, are in a similar case. 
It is this kind of arrangement for cross-breeding to which 
1 The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species. — The 
Various Contrivances by ivhich Orchids are Fertilized by Insects. Second 
Edition revised. — The Effects of Cross and Self -Fertilization in the Vegetable 
Kingdom. By Charles Darwin. London and New York, 1876-77. 
(The Nation, No. 667, April 11, 1878.) <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:50:40 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

in this great order, cross-fertilization must be all but universal 
as between different flowers of the same plant, and commonly 
between different individual plants. 
In both these kinds of hermaphrodite flowers the practical 
separation of the sexes is hardly less than in Oaks, Willows, 
and other trees and herbs, in which the stamens and pistils 
occupy distinct plants or different blossoms. To these three 
classes, then, Mr. Charles Darwin's aphorism, " Nature abhors 
perpetual self-fertilization," undoubtedly applies. But there 
remains an equal number of plants with hermaphrodite blossoms, 
all alike, with no obvious obstacle to fertilization with 
their own pollen, while in many the adaptations are such as 
must apparently insure it, and indeed does very commonly 
insure it. Wherefore it is nowise surprising that self-fertilization 
was the orthodox doctrine — that there was thought to 
be a general adaptation for the falling of the pollen upon the 
stigmas of the same blossom. It is true that Christian Conrad 
Sprengel taught the contrary, in his work entitled " The 
Secret of Nature Discovered," published eighty-five years ago, 
and that he — mainly upon good observations — in a measure 
anticipated Mr. Darwin's aphorism ; but he was accounted 
whimsical and untrustworthy by his own generation, and was 
forgotten by the next. Not so the contemporary " Loves of 
theFlants" — the hymnal of the old orthodox cult — which 
sings the — 
" Gay hopes and amorous sorrows of the mead," 
in verse which our fathers were fond of, but from which we 
will not further quote. Had Dr. Erasmus Darwin known 
Sprengel's book, and brought to it the insight of the grandson, 
how different and how much richer the poem might have 
been. What curious facts and teeming fancies have been left 
unsung ! 
To H. Midler and to Hildebrand, two of Sprengel's countrymen, 
in our own day, may be credited the confirmation of 
the latter's thesis as respects the general run of hermaphrodite 
flowers ; and this by showing what a large proportion even 
of these are functionally unisexual, either by the shedding of 
their pollen before the stigma of that blossom is ready to receive 
it, or by the development and subsequent shrivelling of 
the stigma before the pollen matures, or by various other 
arrangements of like effect. And here, too, comes in the significant 
fact for the evolutionist, that these arrangements belong 
to widely different families, but only to certain of their 
species or groups of species, and not to their near relatives ; 
also that they are more pronounced in some species than in 
others. 
Yet, withal, there is much close-fertilization, and no one 
has demonstrated this better than Mr. Darwin, nor so well 
illustrated its meaning. The more particular and special the 
adaptations for cross-f ertilizatiou — depending, as they mainly 
do, upon insect-transportation, consequent upon visits for nectar 
or other floral products — the greater the chances of no 
fertilization through the failure of the proper insect visitation. 
So nature, not scorning a succedaneum, arranges for self-fertilization 
also as the next best thing, indicating her preference, 
however, by endowing the pollen with greater potency upon 
other stigma than its own ; the principle throughout being to 
place the pollen where it will do the most good, all things 
considered. But Mr. Darwin insists, apparently with reason, 
that cross-breeding is the general plan, and close-breeding the 
subsidiary proceeding, or at least that no species of flowering 
plants is deprived of its chance of wide-breeding, or fails to 
receive the benefit of it for any long number of generations. 
This assumes that wide-breeding is beneficial. The assumption 
is one which a teleologist like Darwin is bound to make, 
and which an investigator like Darwin is bound to verify, if 
possible. The assumption is that ends elaborately brought to 
pass in a large number of species, in a variety of ways, and 
by great nicety and exactness of adaptation, cannot be meaningless 
or useless — must somehow conduce to the well-being 
of the species. Happily, this inference holds equally good 
whether, with the old-fashioned teleologist, the word "end" 
denotes a result aimed at, or, as in Darwinian teleology, a 
result attained. The two senses are not contradictory, and, 
as concerns the validity of the inference, it matters not which 
sense is adopted, or whether the two are combined. Darwin's 
investigation, undertaken to determine by experiments whether 
such crossing is beneficial, is published in the remaining volume 
of the series under consideration — that on " The Effects of 
Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom " It 
does not fall within the scope and limits of this notice to set 
forth the nature and the extent of these experiments. Keaders 
interested will go to the book, and probably have done so 
already. As to the results we may only say that, on the whole, 
they corroborate the inference — in some cases unequivocally 
and strongly, in others feebly, while in a very few the result 
was simply negative. While the crossing in many cases showed 
astonishing reinvigoration, and self-fertilization evident injury, 
the maximum good was obtained at the first or second crossing 
; and some close-fertilized plants soon became tolerant of 
that condition, and retained their fertility for several closebred 
generations. If the Darwinian thesis was on the whole 
maintained, yet it was also shown that plants have many inexplicable 
idiosyncrasies, and that many unknown or obscure 
factors enter into the results of the experiment. On looking 
over the series we are reminded of the late Jeffries Wyman's 
aphorism : "No single experiment in physiology is worth 
anything." 
It seems reasonably made out that the benefit of cross is, 
cceteris paribus, in direct relation to a certain difference in 
constitution between the two parents, or to some difference 
in their surroundings or antecedents, from which diversity of 
constitution may be inferred. The benefit is more decided 
when the parents come together from a distance than when 
grown side by side for several generations, and " a cross between 
two flowers on the same plant does no good, or very 
little good." The qualification is a proper one. It would be 
hasty to infer that it does absolutely no good, even though 
the advantage be inappreciable in any single instance. Still, 
however just and fairly well sustained the principle of Darwin's 
aphorism may be, it is confronted by the immense and 
seemingly endless vitality of long-propagated varieties which 
do not seed at all. 
If we were writing a popular review of this volume on 
cross and self-fertilization, we should make much of the tenth 
and eleventh chapters, on the means of fertilization, and especially 
of cross-fertilization ; on the plants which are sterile, 
or more than half-sterile, without insect aid ; and, above all, 
on the habits of insects in relation to the fertilization of 
flowers. A closing chapter in the volume, on the Forms of 
Flowers, should also receive attention — that in which cleistogamous 
blossoms are discussed, namely, small and inconspicuous 
ones which never open, but are far more fertile than 
the showy ordinary blossoms of the same plants ; for capital 
converse testimony, to the effect that all ordinary flowers are 
in primary reference to cross-fertilization, may be derived 
from the structure and behavior of these blossoms, in which 
the contrary intent is unmistakable. When nature means 
close-fertilization she makes her purpose manifest. Also, we 
should note that this cleistogamy is sporadic, affects certain 
families only, and certain members only of families not otherwise 
particularly related ; so that this peculiarity also seems 
to be of special and apparently late acquisition. When we 
gather into one line the several threads of evidence of this 
sort, to which we have barely alluded, we find that they lead 
in the same direction with the clews furnished by the study 
of abortive organs : slender, indeed, each thread may be, but 
they are manifold, and together they bind us firmly to the 
doctrine of the derivation of species. 
BENTHAM'S FLORA OF AUSTRALIA. 
This volume 1 brings a great undertaking to a happy completion. 
The first volume was issued in the year 1863, and 
the work has made steady progress to the end. It is the complete 
phamogamous Flora of a continent, and the only one ; 
1 Flora Australiensis : a Description of the Plants of the Australian Territory. 
By George Bentham, assisted by Baron Ferdinand von Mueller. 
Roxburghiacew to Filices. London, 1878. (American Journal of Science 
and Arts, 3 ser., xvi. 237.) 
is worked up by one mind and hand, within a time and at an 
age which allows no sensible change of ideas or points of view, 
so that it is throughout comparable with itself. It is the 
work of the most experienced and wise systematic botanist of 
the day, and when we know that fully as much other work, 
of equal character, has been done within these fifteen years, 
it will not be denied that the author's industry and powers of 
accomplishment are unrivalled. No one else has done such 
good botanical work at such a rate. If, as some fear, the 
race of first-class systematic (phaenogamous) botanists is destined 
to die out or dwindle, it will not be for the lack in our 
day of a worthy model. 
In the concluding Preface, Mr. Bentham turns over to his 
able and equally indefatigable coadjutor, Von Mueller, the 
duty of incorporating addenda and corrections, and suggests 
the preparation of a methodical synopsis, for convenient use, 
especially in Australia, where such a handbook will be most 
helpful and needful. This trust, we doubt not, Von Mueller 
will duly undertake, and may be expected worthily to accomplish. 
His fellow-workers over the world are not unmindful 
of their great obligations to him in the development 
of Australian botany, and in rendering practicable the production 
of this " Flora Australiensis " which has been equally 
enriched by his vast collections and facilitated by his preliminary 
study of them. 
Mr. Bentham now declines to undertake " a detailed examination 
of the relations, as well of the whole flora to that 
of other countries, as of its component parts to each other," 
referring instead to " the principles laid down by J. D. Hooker 
in the admirable essay prefixed to his ' Flora Tasmania?, ' ' : 
but recapitulating shortly the general characteristics of the 
chief component parts of the present flora of Australia, the 
most peculiar one of any large part of the globe. Let us still 
hope that he may some day reconsider this determination, so 
far as to discuss in a general way the relations of Australian 
botany to the history of vegetation on the globe. 
Peculiar as the Australian vegetation is, its treatment not 
rarely touches points which concern the student of the Ameri- 
can flora. Especially interesting to us is the elaboration, in 
the present volume, of the Graminem, in which General Munro's 
matured views — as yet little known by publication ■ — 
have passed under the independent consideration of a veteran 
general botanist, and in which the author's own conclusions 
regarding the morphology and terminology of the floral 
parts and their accessories are practically applied. We duly 
noticed Mr. Bentham's essay on this subject, and had to 
acknowledge that its conclusions are apparently incontrovertible. 

Next to this order in importance is the order Cyperacem, 
upon the arrangement of which sound judgment is brought 
to bear. The great order Tiliacem is made to include the 
Smilacem, and not the Roxburghiacem. We should have 
excluded both, but Smilax in preference. Contrary to Mr. 
Bentham's opinion, we should insist that the anthers in 
Smilax are unilocular but bilocellate. The diagnosis of Roxburghiacem 
in the conspectus distinguishes the order from 
Australian Liliaceae only, and by an oversight the second 
genus of the order is said to be restricted to Japan, whereas 
it was founded on a North American plant. 
DE CANDOLLE'S NEW MONOGRAPHS. 
In this form 1 and way we may hope to see the Monocotyledonous 
orders elaborated, and some of the earlier Dicotyledonous 
ones re-elaborated. The middle of this volume is 
filled by the monograph of Restiacem, by Dr. Masters. This 
is an order allied on the one hand to Juncacem, on the other 
to Cyperacem, of twenty genera and two hundred and thirtyfour 
species, wholly of the southern hemisphere, divided 
between South Africa (which has much the larger share), 
1 Monoyraphice Phanerogamarum Prodromi nunc continuatio, nunc remsio, 
auctoribns Alphonso et Casimir De Candolle, aliisque Botanicis ultra 
memoratis. Vol. I. Smilacem, Restiacea;, Meliacece, cum tahulis ix. Fans, 
June, 1878. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xvi. 325 ; 
xxxiv. 490.) 
and Australia with New Zealand, and a single species in Chili. 
It is not a prepossessing family, and presents peculiar difficulties 
to the systematist, on account of the dioecious character 
of most of them, and a striking difference between the plants 
of the two sexes, which in collections are hard to match. 
Much praise is due to Dr. Masters for his great labor, patience, 
and skill. The latter half of the volume is occupied by Casimir 
De Candolle with his neat revision of the Meliacem, 
chiefly a tropical order. The stamineal tube in the monadelphous 
Meliacem is concluded to be a staminiferous disk. The 
Smilacem by Alphonse De Candolle form the smaller but to 
us the most interesting part of the volume. 
This order is restricted to three genera : two of them dioecious, 
Heterosmilax with united sepals, no petals, and three 
monadelphous stamens (east Asiatic), Smilax with separate 
sepals, petals, and (6-15) stamens ; the third, Bhipogonum 
(of New Zealand and Australia), with hermaphrodite flowers. 
Of Smilax one hundred and eighty-six species are characterized, 
and a dozen or two more are obscure or doubtful. There 
are thirty-eight pages of prefatory generalia, in De Candolle's 
best manner. We are pleased to find that he keeps up the 
specific phrase, and with true Linnaean curtness, relegating all 
particulars, not truly diagnostic under the sections and other 
divisions, to the description. In discussing the nature and 
characters of the leaf (which in its general sense is called 
"recentement et assez inutilement phyllome") the morphology 
of the petiolar tendrils has to be considered ; the conclusion 
is that these answer rather to leaflets than to stipules, and the 
articulation, in some species well marked, between the blade 
and the petiole, or in the petiole, is noted as supplying good 
specific characters, which have been overlooked. The umbels 
are centrifugal or cymose. To distinguish, as is here done, 
the perianth into sepals and petals and to use these names 
when practicable, is most proper ; but it hardly follows that 
the term perianth or perigone will then have no raison d'etre. 
Whatever the number and position of the stamens, the carpels 
are superposed to the sepals, as indeed is the case in most 
Monocotyledons. It is pertinently noted that in Smilax, 
always dioecious, and with dull-colored perianth, the pollen is 
papillose as in most entomophilous flowers ; but that Ehipogonum, 
the only hermaphrodite genus, has a smoothish pollen, 
more like that transportable by the winds. Most have odorous 
blossoms, some pleasantly, some the reverse. De Candolle 
asks whether in our Coprosmanthus (the name of which 
indicates the ill odor) this is common to both sexes and the 
same in both. Can any of our readers speak to this ? An 
exposition of the geographical distribution of the order, and 
of what is known of it in a fossil state, is followed by a statement 
that all the four natural sections of Smilax and the two 
other genera — i. e., all the types of the order — coexist in the 
comparatively small area comprised between the north of New 
Holland, the Fiji Islands, the Sandwich Islands, and Japan ; 
that India has four of these six types, New Holland three, 
North America two, all Europe and Africa one ; South America 
only one, but is rich in species. The speculative inference 
is, that, anterior to the eocene formations of Europe, the 
ancestors of the family occupied a continent situated in the 
region above indicated, of which the most ancient form was 
probably monoecious, gamosepalous, apetalous, monadelphous, 
and with more or less volatile pollen, — in short was like Heterosmilax; 
that this ancestor was in that region diversified, 
giving origin to the five other groups, beginning with Eusmilax, 
the widest diffused and most numerous in species, 
and finishing with Bhipogonum, which with lieterosmilax 
has clung to its birthplace. The sole Californian Smilax is 
referred, as a variety, to S. rotund-folia, but is nearer S. 
hispida, although distinct from both. 
Vol. V. Pars secunda : Ampelidem ; by J. E. Planchon, has 
at length appeared. It occupies 350 pages ; and it represents 
a great amount of labor, the permanent value and complete 
acceptance of which cannot be adjudicated off-hand. The 
plan of merging all the forms into one genus, Vitis, has been 
abundantly tried, not with very satisfactory results, — partly, 
it may be, because the groups have not been well worked 
out. Professor Planchon, a most experienced and keen botanist, 
who has especially investigated the Vines for a good 
many years, has very naturally tried the other tack, and has 
developed the Linnaean Vitis and Cissus into ten genera. The 
principles upon which he has proceeded, as explained in the 
preface, are wholly legitimate ; and one could wish that they 
have been successfully applied. This, only use can determine. 
We may be confident, however, that if this monograph 
had been in the hands of the authors of the latest Genera 
Plantarum, they would not have bodily adopted its conclusions, 
although they would have been much helped by the 
elaborate investigations, and might have seen their way to 
admit three or four genera. They would not have trusted 
over-much to the difference between polygamo-dicecious, polygamo-mono3cious 
and partly pseudo-hermaphrodite, hermaphrodite 
and probably some pseudo-hermaphrodite, and hermaphrodite 
or rather physiologically polygamo-monoecious and 
with some blossoms pseudo-hermaphrodite, — differences which 
must be shadowy, — nor to variations in the mere shape of 
style and stigma. And as to the disk, which should be more 
tangible and hopeful, we gather from Planchon's synopsis and 
from our own observations that there are only three types. 
In the true Grapevines the disk is represented by nearly distinct 
and free nectariferous glands, alternate with the stamens. 
In most other Ampelidem, it is cupular or annular (entire or 
crenate or lobed), with base or lower half more adnate to the 
base of the ovary, but at least the margin or lobes free. In 
the Virginia Creeper there is really no disk at all, as was first 
noted by Dr. Torrey in his " Flora of the Northern States," 
m 1824, and insisted on in the " Flora of North America," in 
1838, and again in the " Genera Ulustrata," where there are 
correct figures. Dr. Planchon expresses the same opinion in 
essence but in different language, *. e., "Discus obsoletus 
ovarii basi plane adnatus et tantum colore proprio subdistinctus." 
We could not make much of the color; but the 
tissue does thicken more or less, and possibly may become 
obscurely nectariferous ; but the flowers are not attractive to 
bees, as the allied species from Japan is. In the latter, while 
there is equally no hypogynous disk, there is much thickening 
°f nectariferous tissue over all the lower part of the ovary 
more or less in longitudinal ridges, the whole " plane adnatus " 
throughout. Now we should make more of these three types 
than Dr. Planchon does. For the first goes with the calyptrately 
caducous corolla and polygamo-dioecious flowers of 
true Vitis. The third with disk, if so called, wholly confluent 
with the ovary itself, belongs to and includes all of the few 
known species (including Planchon's Landukia), which have 
the striking biological character of climbing by the dilatation 
and adhesion of the tendril tips ; and their flowers are 5-merous, 
essentially hermaphrodite, and with expanding corolla. 
The second type of disk goes with 4-merous and some 5-merous 
flowers with corolla expanding in anthesis, that is, to the genus 
Cissus. We do not see the way to break this up into genera, 
certainly not on the number of parts, for this varies in some 
species, and while C. stans is 5-merous, the closely related 
G. orientalis is 4-merous. However it may be with some 
exotic groups, we must restore our two species, which formed 
part of Michaux's Ampelopsis, to the genus Cissus. Under 
that view the generic nomenclature is clear. The genus Ampelopsis 
(Michaux, p.p. and Torr. and Gray) is to be maintained 
on the lines long ago laid down in this country, and 
now reinforced, for those species which are popularly well 
known under this name. We do not feel obliged to defer to 
any work of Eafinesque as late as the year 1830. But, as to 
the present point, it seems to us that when Dr. Planchon followed 
him in the appropriation of one part of Michaux's Ampelopsis, 
he should also have adopted Eafinesque's name for 
the other part, namely, Quinaria, instead of making a new 
name, Parthenocissus, the former name being free for use. 
In our view both names are superfluous. As to true Vitis, 
it remains to be seen whether it will be at all possible to dis- 
tinguish twenty or more North American species. Perhaps 
Engelmann allowed quite as many as can be defined. But 
Planchon's long and conscientious labors upon the genus and 
the family must be most helpful even where his conclusions 
are not at once accepted. 1 
1 This is the last Review written by Professor Gray. — C. S. S. 
EPPING FOREST. 
" Epping Forest, and How best to deal with it," is an article 
by Mr. Wallace in the "Fortnightly Review" for November, 
also separately issued, which should not be passed over as a 
matter of local concern. All Mr. Wallace's writings, even 
the most casual, will be found to touch and to illustrate some 
interesting question. A recent act of Parliament having decreed 
that one of the ancient woodland wastes, Epping Forest, 
which lies upon the very borders of London, shall be preserved 
forever as "au open space for the recreation and 
enjoyment of the public," the question what to do with it becomes 
a very practical one. It is not enough to say rejoicingly 
: " Here at length every one will have a right to roam 
unmolested, and to enjoy the beauties which nature so lavishly 
spreads around when left to her own wild luxuriance. Here 
we shall possess, close to our capital, one real forest, whose 
wildness and sylvan character is to be studiously maintained, 
and which will possess an ever-increasing interest as a sample 
of those broad tracts of woodland which once covered so 
much of our country, and which play so conspicuous a part 
in our early history and national folk-lore." Unfortunately 
much of it has been spoiled in all senses of the word. But 
Englishmen know how to plant, and the native trees which 
once covered the domain, with the undergrowth which of old 
accompanied them, could be made to flourish again. Probably 
the ancient forest could be essentially reproduced in all 
its former vigor, and former monotony. Mr. Wallace has 
something better than this in his mind, and his inspiration is 
caught from Professor Asa Gray's Harvard lecture on " Forest 
Geography and Archaeology," which was published last 
summer in the " American Journal of Science," the ideas of 
which he adopts, happily summarizes, and applies to the case 
in hand. In re-foresting the open waste portions of Epping, 
he proposes to establish several distinct portions or broad 
tracts, each composed solely of trees and shrubs belonging to 
1 The Nation, No. 704, December 26, 1878. 
some one of the great forest regions of the temperate zone. 
A climate of which it has, we believe truly, been said that it 
can grow treble the number of species of trees which the Atlantic 
United States can, and in which so many trees have 
been individually tested, offers favorable auspices for an 
undertaking of this kind upon a scale that may give a good 
idea of the features — not of this or that tree or shrub, but 
of a forest of the Alleghanies, of the Sierra Nevada, of British 
Columbia, and of Japan. Even the southern temperate 
zone may contribute from New Zealand its Kauri Bines and 
Beeches, under which Macaulay's overworked New Zealander 
may encamp on returning from his excursion to view the ruins 
of London bridge by moonlight. 
When Mr. Wallace declares that " there is really no difficulty 
in producing in England an almost exact copy of a 
North American forest, with all its variety of foliage, with 
its succession of ornamental flowers, and with its glorious 
autumnal tints," we must agree that the experiment as a 
whole is hopeful, and much of it is already a success in piecemeal 
plantation. But we are not sure about autumnal tints 
under London skies, considering how much these differ between 
one season and another in New England. And, though 
every tree will grow in England, being put to no severe stress 
either in winter or summer, yet not every tree nurtured under 
our climate —so fierce in both seasons — will blossom in 
England, as witness our handsome leguminous tree, Cladrastis, 
or Yellow-wood. But a climate which will fairly nourish on 
one soil the trees of the Atlantic and the Pacific forests, 
those of Japan and Mantchuria, of Siberia, Himalaya, and 
the Caiucasus, along with those to the manner born, deserves 
to possess them all. We, alas ! can seldom grow on one side 
of our continent the trees and shrubs of the other. Moreover, 
there is very little forest east of the Eocky Mountains 
which an act of Congress could preserve ; and, over that little, 
Congress and the Secretary of the Interior have lately 
been at loggerheads. Yet in California we have forests, still 
public domain, which are the veritable wonders of the world, 
which for the most part are doomed to irremediable destruc- 
tion, but of which specimens ought to be preserved now when 
they may, now when it will cost nothing, and injuriously affect 
no man's interest. For the Eedwood it is almost too 
late ; yet a square mile, or half that area, of Eedwood forest 
might still be reserved in Mendocino or Humboldt County. 
And from all accounts a square mile or two of true Big-tree 
forest, on or south of King's Eiver, could well be set apart 
as a perpetual memorial. The Mariposa Grove is indeed 
such a reservation. But this is only a grove of a limited 
number of trees, many of them sadly injured by fires. Farther 
south this great tree is said to be the main constituent of 
extensive forests. A mile or two of Big-tree forest should be 
set apart before this district is invaded. 
HOOKER AND BALL'S TOUR IN MAROCCO. 
The isolation of Marocco from the European world is strikingly 
shown in the fact that up to the publication of this 
goodly volume l the principal geographical authority for the 
interior of the country is Leo Africanus. This man was a 
Moor of Granada, who with his kinsfolk, at the time of the 
siege of Granada in 1492, fled to Fez, then the headquarters 
of Arabic culture, and was taken into favor by Mouley Ahmet, 
the founder of the dynasty still reigning in Marocco. He 
traveled throughout the empire, and wrote in Arabic a description 
of that part of Africa, which he must have had with him 
in manuscript when, in the year 1517, he was captured by 
Christian corsairs, and carried to Eome. The Pope, Leo X., 
hearing of this learned Moor, sent for him, treated him kindly, 
had him baptized, and gave him at the font his own names, 
Giovanni Leone ; and so, as the writer of the narrative before 
us naively remarks, the Moor perhaps became as earnest a 
Christian as the pontiff himself. In Rome he translated his 
1 Journal of a Tour in Marocco and the Great Atlas. By Sir J. D. 
Hooker and John Ball. London and New York, 1878. (The Nation, 
No. 718, April 3, 1879.) 
work into Italian; but it was not printed until 1550, in 
the first edition of Bamusio's " Collection of Voyages and 
Travels." Excepting Gerhard Eohlfs — who, by assuming 
the garb and professing the faith of a Mussulman, traversed 
districts where no Christian dare present himself, and who 
could make only surreptitious observations and trust them to 
memory — our British travelers were the first Europeans to 
travel in South Marocco and to reach the Great Atlas. 
Their opportunity and their success were exceptional. It 
was a botanical expedition, in the spring of 1871, with the 
president of the Eoyal Society and director of Kew Gardens 
at its head, with Mr. Ball, a member, or at least an ex-member 
of Parliament, as his companion, and a third naturalist, Mr. 
George Maw, as their associate for half the journey. High 
influence was required for obtaining the Sultan's permission to 
penetrate the country at all ; and utmost skill, determination, 
and no small assertion were called for to surmount the obstacles 
which were systematically interposed by the authorities, and 
to baffle attempts to lower the personal importance, and therefore 
frustrate the aims, of this scientific embassy. On reaching 
the city of Marocco the playing of the game began. The 
Sultan's letter instructed the governor of Mogador to " send 
the English hakim and his companions to the care of my slave 
El Graoui," said slave being the governor of the whole Great 
Atlas region. The city of Marocco was not in his province ; 
and there the duty of providing for the sustenance and comfort 
of the travelers devolved upon Ben Daoud, governor of 
the city. Before entering the town our travelers had mantiged 
to learn that a very small house with only two rooms had been 
provided for them, and that Ben Daoud meant to make as 
little of them as possible. So a message was sent on that a 
larger house was needed, or else an enclosed garden in which 
to pitch their tents. In reply, a larger house with four rooms 
was offered. On reaching this house at nightfall it proved to 
be mean, dirty, and swarming;, so when the mona, or present 
for the evening meal, came in, it was ordered back with scorn. 
It was felt that submission to any belittling at the outset would 
be the beginning of sorrows. 
"Tell the Governor," said Hooker, " that my Sultana gives 
me a large house with a garden to live in ; hospitality would 
require that the Governor of Marocco should provide me — 
the guest of his Sultan — with a better house ; but, in any case, 
I shall not live in a worse one." 
The messenger returned with the answer : " The Governor 
has no better house to give the Christians ; but Marocco is 
large, and they are welcome to provide for themselves." 
Whereupon the cavalcade moved to the great square, or open 
space, beside the chief mosque and tower of the Kontoubia, 
sending at the same time a message to the Viceroy, son of the 
Sultan, that they should encamp in their own tents until a 
suitable house had been provided. The upshot was that on 
the following day the Viceroy installed them in the palace of 
Ben Dreis, with the adjoining garden, and soundly berated 
the city governor for his churlishness ; but it leaked out that 
the poor governor had only obeyed the express orders of the 
Viceroy, who had directed him to begin by offering the mean 
house, then one somewhat larger, and to leave it to the Viceroy 
himself graciously to meet the higher demands if they 
should be insisted on. Fortunately, too, the row with the city 
governor threw the travelers into the hands and good graces 
of his rival, El Graoui, under whose protection and care they 
were to explore the Atlas range. 
It was now full time to determine how this visit and the 
laborious journey they were to undertake were to be made 
intelligent and satisfactory to El Graoui and the other Moorish 
authorities. The gratification of a desire to learn something 
about the vegetation of the Great Atlas would have 
seemed a thin pretext for some sinister design. An insanity 
of this sort might possess the unaccountable soul of some one 
Christian; but that three should be simultaneously smitten 
with it would be thought to pass the bounds of probability. 
The pretense of collecting live plants for Kew Gardens could 
hardly be made plausible to the Moorish mind, except, haply, 
for that one use of plants that every one can understand. The 
Eoyal Gardens are literally the Queen's Gardens, and herbs 
that will cure diseases are among its most valuable collections. 
Judicious representations upon this line would go far toward 
explaining the strange proceeding of the party of travelers, 
and would contain all the truth they were likely to get credit 
for. So " there is no doubt that the current belief among our 
own followers was, that the Sultana of England had heard that 
there was somewhere in Marocco a plant that would make her 
live forever, and that she had sent her own hakim to find it 
for her." And when it was seen what toil and hardship these 
botanical explorations entailed, the natural commentary upon 
the whole proceeding was : " The Sultana of England is a 
severe woman, and she has threatened to give them stick 
(the bastinado) if they do not find the herb she wants." 
Those interested in the natural history of an almost unknown 
district lying on the very border of Europe ; those 
interested in its geography and physical features ; the statesman 
and philanthropist, who may here contemplate in a typical 
instance the decadence and depletion of a once prosperous 
people, and note the misery which two or three centuries of 
misrule may bring upon a smiling land ; and those who enjoy 
the charm of fresh and graphic narrative, the sketch by a 
practised hand of keen and quick observations by practised 
eyes, — all these will find this volume attractive reading. To 
us it has been fascinating and full of suggestion. The main 
drawback to our travelers' enjoyment was the suffering which 
they unwittingly inflicted on the mountain villagers of the 
Atlas — the poor Berbers, who are altogether the worthier 
part of the population — through the insatiable rapacity of a 
large escort provided by the Moorish government for their 
protection. If the naturalists could have journeyed by themselves, 
with needful attendants under their complete control, 
their support would have entailed no hardship whatever ; but 
the shameless extortion and abuse by the guards, which the 
travelers were unable to prevent, must have left a painful 
remembrance upon their minds as well as upon those of the 
despoiled mountaineers. It is hardly a consolation to the 
former that the latter are used to it. 
The appendix to this charming volume is filled with scientific, 
philological, and geographical details. The most elabo- 
rate article is that " On the Geology of the Plain of Marocco 
and of the Great Atlas," by Mr. Maw. 
As to the orthography of the name of the city and country, 
Morocco is peculiar to the English. In the adoption of 
Marocco the authors follow, as regards the first vowel, the 
universal continental usage. 
BENTHAM ON EUPHORBIACEÆ. 
This thoughtful essay 1 presents the general views attained 
to by Mr. Bentham on working up the genera of the great 
order Euphorbiacem for the ensuing volume of the " Genera 
Plantarum." We need not specify any of the results, except 
to indicate the author's decision in the case of the Buxem. 
He does not follow his predecessors, Baillon and J. Mueller, 
who, much as they differ in other respects, agreed in setting 
up the order Buxacem, taking their cue from Agardh, and 
making much of the dorsal rhaphe. Bentham concludes that 
this small group, however well defined, ought not in a general 
view to be regarded as of higher grade than one of the primary 
divisions, or tribes, of Euphorbiacem. We are not the 
less pleased with this that we quite expected it. 
A wider interest will be felt in Mr. Bentham's excursus on 
nomenclature, or rather on some questions which the study of 
Euphorbiacem brought up, and which some recent discussions 
have made pertinent. The general laws of nomenclature of 
our day, and the principles on which they rest, are laid down 
in the code which was reported by Alphonse De Candolle 
to the Paris International Convention, in the year 1867, 
and, being approved, was published with a commentary in 
the autumn of that year, and in an English translation early 
in the following year. The laws, without the commentary, 
were printed in this Journal for July, 1868. The ten years 
1 Notes on Euphorbiacem. By George Bentham ; Journal LimiEean 
Society, xvii. London, 1880. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 
3 ser., xvii. 335.) 
succeeding have tested, somewhat thoroughly, the questions 
(nearly all of minor moment) upon which differing usages 
prevailed ; and though one or two points are still mooted, the 
great majority of phaenogamous botanists are coming to be 
of one mind and practice. But, as Mr. Bentham remarks : 
" The result has not been quite effectual in checking the everincreasing 
spread of confusion in synonymy. Besides the 
young liberal-minded botanists who scorn to submit to any 
rule but their own, there are others who differ materially in 
their interpretation of some of the laws, or who do not perceive 
that in following too strictly their letter instead of their 
spirit, they are only adding needlessly to the general disorder. 
In the application as well as in the interpretation of 
these rules they do not sufficiently bear in mind two general 
principles : first, that the object of the Linnaean nomenclature 
is the ready identification of species, genera, or other 
groups for study or reference, not the glorification of botanists; 
and secondly, that changing an established name is 
very different from giving a new name to a new plant." 
It is to the latter point that this most experienced and 
even-minded botanist addresses himself. " The rule that lon<ro 

established custom amounts to prescription, and may justify 
the maintenance of names which form exceptions to those 
laws which should be strictly adhered to in naming new 
plants, is unfortunately now frequently ignored. . . . The 
law of priority is an excellent one ; and when a genus or 
species has been well defined by an early botanist in a generally 
accessible work, but has subsequently been neglected, 
and the plant became known under other names, it is well 
that the original one should be restored. . . . On the other 
hand, it creates nothing but confusion to suppress a generic 
name, well-characterized and universally adopted by long 
custom, in favor of a long-forgotten one, vaguely designated in 
an obscure work, out of the reach of the great majority of 
botanists. . . . The greater number of Necker's genera have 
been so imperfectly characterized, with so absurd a terminology, 
that they are quite indeterminable ; and his names deserve 
to be absolutely ignored, except in the very few cases 
260 REVIEWS. 
where Jussieu or other early French botanists have succeeded 
in identifying them, and corrected their characters ; but even 
then it is doubtful whether these names should not bear the 
date of the correction, rather than of the original work. 
Adanson's ' Families,' with all the inconveniences of its 
form and absurd orthography, is much more scientific, and 
many of his genera are well defined, and have therefore been 
properly adopted." . . . 
Let us here interject a practical application. There is an 
old and well-established genus Smilacina of Desfontaines. 
There is a much older genus Tovaria of Euiz and Pavon, 
founded in 1794, ever since accepted, and without a synonym. 
Eecently Mr. Baker of Kew, finding that Necker has 
a Tovaria, published in 1790, and therefore four years earlier 
than that of Euiz and Pavon, takes up this name in place of 
Smilacina, and leaves a new name to be made for the longestablished 
homonymous genus. It will be said that the rule 
of priority demands the sacrifice, and that the identification 
of Necker's genus is sure, because the three Linnaean species 
of Convallaria which properly constitute Desfontaines' Smilacina 
are referred to it by name ; and that, though it be a 
case of summum jus summa injuria, the injurious consequence 
is a necessity. But Mr. Bentham's characterization 
of Necker's work applies even to this instance. Twice over 
Necker's Tovaria is described as having a perianth of five 
sepals, and the berry is said to be one-celled. Desfontaines' 
Smilacina, on the other hand, is correctly characterized. 
Moreover, if we do not include this among those names of 
Necker which, Mr. Bentham says, " deserve to be absolutely 
ignored," we may yet find that the law of priority has another 
claim on it. In 1763 a much better botanist than 
Necker, namely, Adanson, founded a genus Tovara (essentially 
the same name as Tovaria) on Polygonum Virginianum, L., 
which is not unlikely to be taken up as a genus ; and the 
name would supersede Necker's by the same rule that Necker's 
supersedes Desfontaines' Smilacina. All things considered, 
then, this is a case for the application of the homely but useful 
rule Quieta non movere ; and much of Mr. Bentham's 
pertinent advice may be condensed into this maxim. But 
there remain nice questions to settle with regard to the names 
and extent of the Liliaceous genus. 
" The representing the Greek aspirate by an h was generally 
neglected by early botanists ; but now, ever since 
De Candolle altered Elichrysum into Helichrysum, modern 
purists have insisted upon inserting the h in all cases ; and 
this has been so far acquiesced in that it is difficult now to 
object to it, though it has the effect of removing so many 
generic names to a distant part of all indexes, alphabetical 
catalogues, etc. Admitting the propriety of adding the aspirate 
in new names, I had long declined to alter old names 
on this account ; now, however, I find myself compelled to follow 
the current." Which is, on the whole, regrettable, especially 
as Alphonse De Candolle would hold out with him. See 
the latter' s comment on his Article 66, in which the remark 
is dropped, that "we do not see why we should be more 
rigorous than the Greeks themselves." Oddly enough, these 
same writers who must supply the aspirate to the e omit it 
from the r, and write rachis and raphe, instead of rhachis and 
rhaphe, — which is exasperating to lovers of uniformity. 
It is unnecessary here to cite Mr. Bentham's appropriate 
illustration of the indivisibility of the two-worded name of a 
plant. The proper apprehension of this, and of the paramount 
rule that no unnecessary new names should be given 
to old plants, will go far to rid the science of a principal 
remaining ambiguity in nomenclature. For it clearly follows 
that when a plant has a rightful name under its proper genus, 
the specific half of it is not to be changed because of any 
earlier specific name under some other genus, to which the 
plant does not belong. 
ON THE SELF-FERTILIZATION OF PLANTS. 263 
HENSLOW ON THE SELF-FERTILIZATION OF PLANTS. 
This paper 1 is elaborate, mostly able as well as ingenious, 
in all respects considerable, and unconvincing. Its thesis is 
the Darwinian " Nature abhors perpetual self-fertilization " 
read backward. It concludes that, " not only are the majority 
of plaints self-fertilizing, but that those which are exclusively 
so propagate abundantly and with extraordinary rapidity, are 
best able to establish themselves in foreign countries, as, being 
quite independent of insects, they run no risk of extermination 
on that score ; . . . that, so far from there beinc 
any necessarily injurious or evil effects resulting from the 
self-fertilization of plants in a state of nature, they have 
proved themselves to be in every way the best fitted to survive 
in the great struggle for life." The hypothesis is also 
advanced " that they are all degraded forms," and that therefore 
" their ancestral life-history is a longer one than that of 
their more conspicuous and intercrossing relations." We fail 
to see how this follows, except upon the assumption that the 
earliest phaenogamous plants had the most highly organized 
blossoms ; and that would not accord with vegetable palaeontology. 

Mr. Henslow rejoices that he has one stanch supporter ; 
" for, as has been seen, Mr. T. Median has arrived at the 
same conclusion ; " and indeed he builds not a little upon 
facts supplied by Mr. Median's observations. He cites the 
latter's " admirable paper, which was reproduced in the 
' Gardner's Chronicle ' for September 11, 1875, and is in fact 
an ' apology ' for self-fertilization." As he then marshals 
twenty reasons for believing particular plants to bo normally 
self-fertilizing, and nineteen " chief facts which may bo regarded 
as occurring correlatively with self-fertilization, some 
being actual causes which directly or indirectly bring it about," 
it would appear that it is no longer self-fertilization, but 
1 On the Self -Fertilization of Plants. By George Henslow ; Transactions 
LimiEean Society, 2 ser., Bot. i. London, 1879. (American Journal of 
Science and Arts, 3 ser., xvii. 489.) 
rather the existence and raison d'etre of cross-fertilization 
that stands in need of apology, or of explanation. 
He freely concedes that the flowers of many plants, and 
some whole orders, are so constructed that intercrossing is for 
them a necessity ; also that most of those which are believed 
" to be normally self-fertilizing " because they can and do 
fertilize themselves habitually, yet " may in some cases be 
cross-fertilized by insects." It is admitted that the structure 
of the latter is adapted — most variously and wondrously 
adapted —to being fertilized by particular insects. As this 
comes to pass in plants and flowers of the highest organization 
and greatest specialization, Darwin and his school conclude 
that this is a most advantageous outcome, and means 
some real good to the species ; that when this is accompanied 
with a loss of self-fertility, it is the loss of something no 
longer useful, something better than self -fertility having taken 
its place. But Mr. Henslow, reading this the other way, 
having determined " that self-fertilization is per se a decided 
advantage," and free from injurious liability, comes to regard 
intercrossing as merely " a compensatory process for the loss 
of self-fertility." 
But how and why did this " compensatory process " come to 
pass ? It is conceived on both sides that flowers were " primordially 
inconspicuous." (To this Henslow adds hermaphrodite 
and self-fertile, but that need not here come into 
account.) Both agree that insects have mainly determined 
their conspicuousness. Darwin says this has been determined 
through natural selection by the survival of the more and 
more conspicuous variations, correlated with their producing 
something good for the insect of which the coloration was a 
sign, and that the preferential survival of the more showy 
and attractive was a consequence of some benefit of the intercrossing. 
Henslow propounds the view that insects have determined 
the conspicuousness more directly, and not by benefiting 
but by irritating the flowers. " These, by being greatly 
stimulated by the repeated visits of insects, tend to become 
hypertrophied. Hence the corolla enlarges, becomes more 
brightly colored, the nectariferous organs increase the quan- 
264 REVIEWS. 
tity of secretion, and the stamens develop more pollen. Such 
beino - the case, nourishment is withheld from the pistil, which 
is delayed in its development ; consequently such a flower is 
very generally proterandrous." Mr. Darwin might accept 
this as an ingenious conception of the way the specialization 
comes about, still insisting on the advantage of the resulting 
intercrossing "or else the thing would hardly come to pass," 
as the poet has it. And Mr. Henslow's hypothesis has to be 
supplemented to account for proterogyny, which is not much 
less common. But Henslow's supposed process works evil 
instead of good, and is therefore utterly anti-Darwinian and 
"dysteleological." For the result is a disturbance of the 
equilibrium and proper correlation between the andrcecium 
and gynoecium ; and this, carried further, should upon this 
view result in the monoecious and dioecious states. So, accordingly, 
the cross-fertilization which comes into play in the 
case of separated sexes, and in that of self-sterile hermaphroditism, 
is not for any good there is in it per se, but because 
it may no better be. And all the elaborate, exquisite, and 
wonderfully various modes of adaptation of flowers to insects 
are only ways of repairing the damages inflicted upon blossoms 
by insects through their persistent visits ! Did Mr. 
Henslow ever ask himself the question why the sexes are 
separate in animals ? 
The conclusion which Mr. Darwin has helped us to reach 
is, that intercrossing should be regarded as the aim in nature 
and on the whole most beneficial, and self-fertilization as a 
safeguard against the risks of crossing ; that most hermaphrodite 
flowers have the advantage of both, the latter for immediate 
sureness, the former for ultimate benefit. Upon the new 
view, self-fertilization is the aim and the consummation, and 
cross-fertilization at best a succedaneum. By it insects may 
repair the damage they have caused to blossoms through endowing 
them with " the fatal gift of beauty," and stimulating 
their organs of secretion ; and by it the winds may bring 
chance relief to those which, at length abandoned by their 
spoilers, have lost this attractiveness and fallen to the degradation 
of unisexuality. For these last, as has already been 
stated, are hypothetical^ regarded as degraded from higher 
floral types. 
We are bound to glance at some of the considerations 
which are adduced in support of this thesis. They are multifarious 
and of unequal value. As has occurred in other cases, 
so here also, the weightiest objections to Mr. Darwin's view 
are those which he has himself brought out, namely, the fact 
that, as tested experimentally under cultivation, while some 
plants are much increased in vigor and fertility by artificial 
intercrossing, others are not sensibly benefited ; and that the 
benefit derived in marked cases is not cumulative, but reaches 
its maximum in two or three generations. And even close 
breeding under cultivation occasionadly gives rise to very 
vigorous and fully prolific self-fertile races. Then many 
plants are fully self-fertile in nature, and it is not proved that 
any such have lost or are in the way of losing either fertility 
or vigor through continued inter-breeding. But, before drawing 
from this the conclusion that cross-fertilization is of little 
or no account in nature, it should be remembered that budpropagated 
races are in similar case. Baces exist which have 
been propagated only from buds for hundreds of years, with 
seemingly undiminished vigor, and there is no proof that any 
one has succumbed under the process. But for all that we 
do not doubt that sexual reproduction contributes something 
to the wellbeing of the species, besides facilitating its dispersion. 
Again, no one questions the necessity of fertilization 
by pollen to the production of embryo in the seed ; yet, even 
in this, the necessity is not so imminent but that some embryos 
may originate without it. 
In short, the facts brought out by Darwin and others, and 
all the considerations of the present essays, are best harmonized 
by the conception which the former has consistently 
maintained, namely, that an occasional cross suffices to secure 
the benefit of intercrossing, whatever that may be. Nothing 
yet appears which seriously disturbs our conviction that just 
this is what nature generally provides for. 
Mr. Henslow's proposition, " The majority of flowers are 
self-fertile," is doubtless true in the sense that they are capa- 
ON THE SELF-FERTILIZATION OF PLANTS. 267 
ble of self-fertilization, and is not improbable in the sense 
that they " can and do fertilize themselves habitually." But 
his inference that the majority of flowers, or that any flowers, 
actually propagate for a series of generations by self-fecundation, 
or that a cross if it occur is " exceptional," and of no 
account, is surely unwarranted by the evidence which he has 
adduced. 
Occasionally the reported facts will not bear scrutiny. 
Gentiana Andrewsii, it is said, never opens at all in America. 
It opens in sunshine in the middle of the day here in New 
Eno-land. And while looking at closed flowers we have seen 
a humble-bee emerge from one. We have in this Journal 
shown how it is that self-fertilization is impossible during the 
first three or four clays of anthesis, but neatly practicable afterwards. 
It is rash to infer (as on p. 330) that papilionaceous 
flowers which shed their pollen early in proximity to the 
stigma are therefore self-fertilized. In most of the cases adduced 
the pollen is not lodged upon the stigma, but upon the 
style below it, and the adaptations for intercrossing, though 
the mechanism be different, are as explicit as in the analogous 
case of Campanula. " Fremont pathetically describes the 
solitary bee that rested on his shoulder at the top of Pike's 
Peak." The pathos is wasted as respects all but this particular 
bee ; for the entomologists find the alpine region of the 
Bocky Mountains to be as well stocked with flying insects as 
are alpine regions in other parts of the world. They do not 
super-abound, but if from the alpine flora we subtract the evidently 
entomophilous and the anemophilous blossoms, the remainder 
will be nearly nil. And as to the correlation of this 
comparative scarcity of insects with the marked conspicuousness 
of blossoms, this is the way the lesson is read by a most 
eminent physiologist : " Even the glowing hue of alpine flowers 
is accounted for by the attraction which brighter-colored 
individuals exercise upon the insects, scarce in those heights 
and necessary for fertilization." 
One or two of the author's own observations are perhaps to 
be revised. " Gaura parviflora . . . has no corolla and is 
cleistogamous, in that it is self-fertilizing in bud, as I found 
in specimens growing at Kew." Were they not imperfectly 
developed blossoms, perhaps late in the season ? Here 
the flowers open freely, and have rose-colored petals. If he 
will examine fresh specimens of Scrophularia, it will soon be 
clear that his idea of their self-fertilization (p. 371) is a mistake. 
It is a mere slip in the " Genera Blantarum " through 
which abortive stamens are attributed to the cleistogamous 
flowers of Epiphegus. The authors evidently meant to 
describe the case just as Mr. Henslow found it to be, but used 
a wrong word. 
" Weeds are probably all self-fertilizing or anemophilous. 
A weed is simply an unattractive plant, and possessing no 
feature worthy of cultivation." It may be as difficult to define 
" a weed " as to define " dirt." But, turning to the " Handbook 
of the British Flora," we find, as we expected, that the showy 
Corn Poppy, Cockle, and Larkspur are denominated weeds. 
Why weeds should possess the vigor and gain the predominance 
which they do is a large question, to which other solutions 
have been offered than that one which is in this essay 
very plausibly maintained. We cannot take up the topic 
here ; but, without acceding to his general proposition, we are 
much disposed to agree with the author in this essay, as respects 
some of them, that aptitude for self-fertilization may have 
given them the advantage which has determined their wide 
dispersion. 
The insistence upon the importance of self-fertilization is 
what gives this essay its value. As a whole it fortifies the 
proposition, well laid down by Herman Midler, which Mr. 
Henslow cites: " that, under certain conditions, the facility 
for self-fertilization is most advantageous to a plant, while, 
under other conditions, the inevitableness of cross-fertilization 
by the visits of insects is the more advantageous." But this 
is not our author's thesis. It comes to this : the plan of nature 
is either cross-fertilization supplemented by close-fertilization, 
or close-fertilization tempered by cross-fertilization. As restricted 
to plants the difference is not wide. Begarded generally, 
the Darwinian axiom is still best sustained. 
268 REVIEWS. 
PLANT ARCHÆOLOGY. 
Investigations in fossil botany are recondite and technical, 
the materials generally unattractive, and the results 
unintelligible to the popular mind; but in Count Saporta's 
" Monde des Blantes," 1 and under his happy exposition, the 
stony desert is made to rejoice and blossom as the Bose. The 
interest which we take in the vegetation of former periods 
is not so much geological as genealogical; and this interest 
diminishes with the distance from our own time and environment. 
We know nothing of the earliest plants — the beginnings 
of vegetable even more than of animal life are beyond 
our ken ; no great satisfaction seems obtainable from the 
small acquaintance that has been made with the plants which 
flourished before the carboniferous period. And the botany 
of that age, notwithstanding its wealth of Ferns and its adumbrations 
of next higher types, impresses us as much with the 
sense of strangeness as of wonderful luxuriance. For even 
the fern-impressions, familiar as they may look to the unprofessional 
observer, are outlandish. The more the critical student 
knows of them the less likeness he finds in them, or in 
the coal-vegetation generally, to any species or genera now 
living. 2 But in the vegetation of cretaceous, and still more 
of tertiary times, familiar forms first come to view, and pedigrees 
may begin to be traced. Questions of ancestry touch 
us more nearly than those of history ; so an enquiry into the 
source and parentage of the plants with which man is associated 
is more attractive than any question concerning the 
origin of the pristine vegetation of the earth. Moreover, our 
1 Le Monde des Plantes avant V Apparition de I'Homme. Par le Comte 
de Saporta. Paris and New York, 1879. (The Nation, Nos. 742 and 
743, September 18 and 25, 1879.) 
2 To those who wish to get a good coup d'ceil of this vegetation from 
authentic records systematically arranged, we recommend the " Atlas to 
the Coal Flora of Pennsylvania and of the Carboniferous Formation 
throughout the United States," by Leo Lesquereux, an octavo volume of 
eighty-seven double plates, just issued by the Second Geological Survey 
of Pennsylvania. There is nothing else to be compared with it. 
knowledge of the later fossil botany is comparatively full, — 
wonderfully so, considering how very recent this knowledge is, 
— and we are in a condition to apply it hopefully and confidently 
to the solution of problems which not long ago seemed 
to be beyond the reach of proper scientific enquiry, namely, to 
the explanation of the actual distribution of the species of 
plants over the earth. For the main data themselves, and for 
the clear exposition of them, we are most largely indebted to 
three men, who happily are still alive and active — Heer, 
Lesquereux, and Saporta. 
The Linnams and facile princeps of tertiary botany is 
Oswald Heer, of Zurich, now a septuagenarian, but still in 
harness. His " Eecherches sur la Climat et la Vegetation du 
Bays Tertiare," rendered into French by C. T. Gaudin, was 
published nearly twenty years ago. It is a general and comparatively 
untechnical presentation of a long line of investigations, 
which have since been crowned by his several memoirs 
on arctic phyto-palseontology, now collected in the five volumes 
of his " Flora Fossilis Arctica." All these volumes, as well as 
others on the Swiss tertiary, have appeared within the last 
ten years, the latest only a year ago. 
Leo Lesquereux, Fleer's compatriot, and barely his junior, 
came to the United States fully thirty years ago, drawn hither 
from Neufchatel by Agassiz. The greater part of his researches 
relate to the carboniferous flora, and he has recently 
thrown interesting light upon silurian botany, as has Dawson 
of Montreal upon the intermediate devonian. But those 
which at present concern us relate to the cretaceous and the 
tertiary of our own western regions. The most considerable 
of these works are the two notable quarto volumes, entitled 
" Contributions to the Fossil Flora of the Western Territories," 
published by the Geological and Geographical Survey of the 
Territories under Dr. Hayden, upon whom and whose survey 
they reflect high credit. One volume treats of the cretaceous, 
one of the tertiary flora. 
Any proper enumeration of authorities upon the fossil 
botany of the later periods should include various other names, 
and especially that of Schimper, of Strassburg, who, like 
Lesquereux, has divided his life between bryology and fossil 
botany, and whose classical " Traite de Paleontologie Vegetale" 
is a systematic compendium of what was known of fossil 
plants up to the year 1874. But the volume now under notice 
is by a younger man, Gaston, Comte de Saporta, a Provencal, 
who has for fifteen years or more been investigating the rich 
tertiary deposits of Aix and vicinity, in the delta of the 
Rhone the results of which have appeared from time to time 
in memoirs, mainly published in the " Annales des Sciences 
Naturelles." Besides these weightier and more technical publications, 
Count Saporta has contributed to the " Eevue des 
Deux Mondes" and to "La Nature" subsidiary articles of a 
popular cast and of fine literary as well as scientific finish. 
These, now collected and re-edited, form a part of the volume 
before us, "Le Monde des Blantes avant l'Apparition de 
l'Homme," which has been published since the commencement 
of the current year. It is the most comprehensive and the 
most attractive, as well as the most recent, exposition of our 
subject, is a very readable book from beginning to end, of 
inviting typography, with abundant illustrations, both of 
woodcuts in the letter-press and intercalated plates. Although 
a popular, it is a truly scientific volume. The clear stream 
of the narrative is hardly at all troubled by the many technical 
terms which unavoidably strew its course, yet without 
obstructing its flow, for the author has the peculiarly French 
gift of happy exposition. As the volume is likely to be 
reproduced in English, let us hope that it may have a translator 
in whose hands it may lose nothing of its clearness, and 
as little as possible of its freshness and spirit. 
To attempt a popular abstract of such a book would be like 
skimming the cream from the cream, and a critical review 
would cover too much or too technical ground. Still, we may 
give some general idea of the contents of the volume. The 
first part and the most discursive portion of the book is 
entitled " Phenomena and Theories." The introductory chapter 
discourses upon the introduction of life and the origin of 
the earliest terrestrial organisms; and the second chapter takes 
up the theory of Evolution or Transformism. We may skip 
these chapters, yet without advising the reader to follow the 
example, unless he is already familiar with the topic — now a 
little threadbare — for, as a popular presentation, it is neat 
and sensible, though not profound. It hardly need be said 
that Saporta is an evolutionist, using the term in its general 
sense, and apparently a thorough Darwinian. A vegetable 
palaeontologist who studies the later geological deposits cannot 
be otherwise; at least, he must needs be a " transformist." 
Saporta concludes that palaeontology, if it does not furnish 
demonstration, yet gives irresistible reasons for a belief in 
evolution. The ground and the nature of this conviction 
appear in his rounded statement, that there is not a tree or 
shrub in Europe, in North America, at the Canaries, in the 
Mediterranean region, the ancestry of which is not recognizable, 
more or less distinctly, in a fossil state. This is too 
absolutely stated, no doubt, but the qualifications it may need 
will not invalidate the conclusion. 
The chapter on ancient climates which follows, and forms 
a proper introduction to the second part of the book, is worthy 
of particular attention. It is prefaced by an elementary but 
very graphic exposition of the phenomena and laws of climates 
and their diversities, from the regular succession of equal days 
and nights under the equator to the contrasted condition 
toward the pole of a year composed of a day and a night season, 
separated by a season of twilight ; the change so rapid in 
the high latitudes that, while the summer day at the North 
Cape is two months long, at Spitzbergen seven additional 
degrees of latitude lengthen it to four months. Let the 
author point the contrast between the two extremes, as affecting 
man, in his own language, here somewhat exceptionally 
ornate : — 
"II est vrai que dans ce dernier pays [Spitzbergen] le soleil s'e"-leve 
au plus de 37 degre's au-dessus de l'horizyon ; il n'envoie que 
des rayons sans chaleur, telum imbelle sine ictu ; il Cclaire de sa 
lueur pale une terre glacee ou frissonnent quelques plantes ensevelies 
sous les frimas, et qui ne sortent du sommeil qui les tient dix 
mois inertes que pour accomplir hativement leurs fonctions vitales 
et se rendormir de nouveau. Quel tableau, si Ton songe aux forSts 
vier-res du Br&il et de Java, aux vallees profondes du Nepaul, aux 
savanes noyees de l'Orenoque, oh la vie surabonde, oil une lumiere 
ardente, vive et dor£e, ondule de toutes parts, souleve de tiedes 
vapeurs, joue avec l'ombre, et fait resplendir les formes des plus 
merveilleux veg^taux! Sous les tropiques, l'homme se sent eci-ase" 
par une vie exuberante, il lutte incessament pour maintenir sa place 
au milieu de la nature, dout il est domine ; ses plus fortes ceuvres sont 
envahies en peu de temps ; les arbres immenses reprennent possession 
du sol, des que celui-ci est abandonne" a lui-meme. Dans l'extreme 
Nord, la faiblesse de l'homme est encore plus eVidente, mais c'est 
du po'ids de la nature inerte qu'il est accable'. Les elements regnent 
seuls dans ces regions deVastees, oh I' atmosphere se trouve hvree a 
d'^pouvantables tourmentes. La neige derobe les asperites du sol, la 
glace couvre la mar d'un sol factice, souvent mobile et toujours dangereux 
; la confusion est partout, le calme nulle part ; chaque pas est 
penible, la vie elle-meme devient un effort que l'energie la mieux 
trempee ne peut soutenir longtemps sans succomber." (p. 212.) 
The modifications of this contrast through the actual distribution 
of land and water, winds and currents, are then considered. 
As these have a fixity secondary only to the fundamental 
elements of climate, — namely, the heat of the sun, the 
inclination of the earth's axis to the plane of its orbit, and 
the relative density of the atmosphere according to the elevation 
of the land-surface, — the climate of any part of the world 
might be supposed to have been constant, oscillations excepted, 
through the long periods that have elapsed since existing 
species or their immediate ancestors were introduced. It is 
not very long ago that Arago demonstrated, to his own and 
the general satisfaction, that there has been no appreciable 
change of the earth's climate in man's time. Elants are the 
thermometers of the ages, by which climatic extremes and 
climates in general through long periods are best measured. 
For at least five or six thousand years the Vine and the Datepalm 
have grown in proximity, and have furnished grapes 
and dates to the inhabitants of the warmer shores of the 
Mediterranean. Yet a very moderate change either way in 
the temperature would have excluded the one or the other. 
So Arago concluded that man had witnessed no sensible 
changes in the climate of Europe ; a good conclusion, if re- 
stricted within the limits of observation. But in Arago's lifetime 
the evidence was already accumulating which has now 
proved that in earlier times man and the reindeer lived 
together on the soil of southern France, when if grapes could 
ripen in Syria and northern Egypt, dates doubtless could not. 
Then, at a still earlier day, Palms flourished in Switzerland 
and Vines in Iceland. Then Maples, Lindens, Plane-trees, 
Spruces, and Pines formed forests in Greenland up at least to 
the eightieth parallel ; and, indeed, our own southern Cypress, 
or Taxodium — which now barely maintains its existence 
between the mouths of Delaware Bay and the Chesapeake — 
flourished along with the Silver Fir of Europe, within two 
hundred leagues of the North Pole. A climate in Greenland 
in which Sequoias, now confined to California, Magnolias, 
Persimmons, and Grapevines were mixed with Maples, Oaks, 
and Poplars, could not have been colder than, or much unlike, 
that of Indiana and Kentucky now. 
As we have seen, the vegetable world has had an eventful 
history, and this history Count Saporta undertakes to reconstruct 
from ancient and authentic documents. 
These documents have settled one point with certainty, 
namely, that the great changes in the temperature of the polar 
regions have not resulted from any change in the earth's axis 
of rotation, such as certain physical geologists have supposed. 
That this has remained steady throughout the whole period in 
question is as good as proved by the identity of the miocene 
and other tertiary fossil plants in all longitudes, from the 
Mackenzie Eiver and Alaska round to Spitzbergen, Iceland, 
and Greenland —in part the same species, in all the same 
or equivalent combinations. Not indeed the same species in 
the same latitude any more than now, but such latitudinal 
distribution as to show that the curvatures of the miocene 
isotherms were quite analogous to those of the present age. 
Moreover, the monotony which characterizes the sub-polar 
vegetation of the present day — when the most of the species 
and the combinations of species occur all round the world — 
equally characterized it then when clothed with forest trees of 
a temperate zone. 
Upon the data in hand, now much extended, and on the 
supposition that the same species of tree had not appreciably 
altered meanwhile in its relations to temperature, Heer long 
ago elaborately compared the miocene climates with those of 
our time, and Saporta corroborates his conclusions. For the 
northern regions the difference is said to be equivalent to 25 
or 30 degrees of latitude — that is, we have now, say in Europe, 
in latitude 40° and 45°, and in Atlantic America, in 
latitude 38° to 40°, the temperature and the vegetation which 
then flourished at latitude 70° in Greenland. Grinnell Land, 
in latitude 82°, only two hundred leagues from the pole, had 
a forest of coniferous trees ; among them — associated with a 
Poplar-tree, a Hazel, and a Birch — was the Silver Fir of 
Europe, and the Bald Cypress of the swamps of the southern 
United States. The same combination, minus the Cypress, 
must now be sought in the more elevated parts of central and 
southern Germany. The Sequoias and Magnolias and Bersimmons 
of Greenland, in latitude 70°, mingled with Maples, 
Oaks, and Grapevines, have their representatives partly in 
Virginia and on the Ohio Eiver, partly in California. The 
miocene of the southern shore of the Baltic had Laurels, Oleanders, 
and Camphor-trees, but no Palms, so far as is known, 
thus answering to the Mediterranean flora, but miocene Palms 
reached to Belgium and Bohemia ; and Provence, on similar 
data, had then about the climate of the coast of Zanzibar. 
Another conclusion which Saporta confidently reaches — 
and which indeed is reached from all sides — is that of a very 
moist quaternary climate. Looking back to this comparatively 
recent period from our own, everywhere the streams 
have dwindled. Through great river-beds shrunken streamlets 
now meander in insignificant channels ; springs reach the 
surface much lower down the valleys than of old; and the 
" rivers without water " of Egypt and Syria, and the reduced 
level of the Dead Sea, are so many evidences of a dryness 
supervening upon a general humidity greatly in excess of the 
present. These fuller watercourses of themselves indicate a 
more temperate or mean climate, a more equal distribution of 
heat and cold through the year. Was this equable climate 
frigid and rigorous or comparatively mild ? Were Europe 
and the United States simply arctic and to be compared with 
the present Greenland and Spitzbergen, as the school of 
Agassiz maintains? Or should the comparison rather be 
made with southern New Zealand, where Tree-ferns almost 
overhang the terminal moraines of existing glaciers, in a climate 
which is neither cold nor warm? Saporta maintains 
the latter, and he is not alone. He insists that the high Alps 
and the Pyrenees are not the types of glacial Europe generally 
; that the arctic animals and plants, and the rigorous climate 
which we associate with these, belonged only to the close 
neighborhood of glaciers, but that the valleys below enjoyed 
a climate even milder than now, although vastly more humid. 
So, likewise, Mr. Ball (in a lecture recently delivered before 
the Boyal Geographical Society of Great Britain) ventures to 
affirm that, even during the period of maximum cold, the 
highest ridges of the Alps were not completely covered with 
snow and ice ; for we still see, by the appearance of the surface, 
the limit above which the ancient ice did not reach ; and 
in the middle zone the slopes that rose above the ancient glaciers 
had a summer climate not very different from that which 
now prevails. And he concludes that the effect on the growth 
of plants in the Alps was to lower the vertical height of the 
zones of vegetation only one or two thousand feet. 1 
This would seriously affect the forests of Europe, but would 
not permanently disturb the alpine and sub-alpine vegetation. 
Yet cold it must have been when the reindeer and musk-ox 
roamed over the plains of central Europe, and when the elephant 
or mammoth and even the rhinoceros which accompanied 
them, were equally clad with a thick coat of hair. 
But, says Saporta, with the remains of these very animals 
from which a frigid arctic climate is inferred, occur also, in 
the alluvia of the Somme and the Seine, those of an elephant 
nearly related to the Indian species, the hippopotamus of the 
African rivers, and the hyena of the Cape ; and the vegetable 
1 But Mr. Ball is fairly astounding when he assumes that our arcticalpine 
flora may have been the flora of high mountains at low latitudes in 
the carboniferous period. 
remains include the Laurel of the Canaries along with the 
Vine. The trees of the same epoch farther north were Pines, 
Lindens, Maples, and Oaks. So, according to Saporta, even 
the glacial period formed only a seeming interruption to the 
general course, the steady and really unbroken diminution of 
terrestrial temperature from the earliest geological periods to 
the present. This must be admitted if the two classes of animals 
and plants — those adapted to cold and those to warmer 
climates — were really contemporaneous. Our geologists have 
maintained that they were not, but that climates have oscillated, 
and that warmer periods than ours intervened between 
the glacial epoch and the present, or were intercalated in the 
o-lacial period itself. But is not the distinction of periods an 
assumption for explaining the two kinds of fossil remains ? 
We need not enter here into the discussion of the cause of 
the higher temperature of ancient climates, and of that peculiar 
and temporary state of things attending and originating 
the glacial epoch, with which Saporta concludes his third 
chapter. And no space is left us in which to sketch even the 
outlines of the second part and main staple of his book, the 
history of the vegetable periods, beginning with the " primordial 
marine plants " of the Laurentian and closing with the 
pliocene, in which existing trees are everywhere identified. 
The general conclusion of these very rich, elaborate, and wellconsidered 
chapters is that the vegetation of the earth has 
been continuous through all ages, and that the explanation of 
the present is found in the past. The history of the genus 
Sequoia — of the two " big trees of California " — as recently 
sketched by Heer in a popular journal, " Das Ausland," is a 
fair illustration of this. The difference between these two 
trees is as notable as their resemblance and their isolation. 
They are the survivors of a numerous family, of wide distribution, 
which is first recognized in the cretaceous formation, 
in several species, and which reached its maximum in 
the middle tertiary, in fourteen recognizable species or forms. 
Almost from the first these separate into two groups, one foreshadowing 
the Coast, the other the Sierra, Eedwood, yet with 
various intermediate forms. These intermediate species are 
extinct, the two extreme forms have survived. The likeness 
of these two trees is explained by their genealogy, their 
marked difference by the extinction of the connecting forms 
which in earlier times bridge the interval. 
SERENO WATSON ON NORTH AMERICAN LILIACEÆ. 
Mr. Watson, in preparing the Monocotyledonece for the 
" Botany of California," came upon the order Tiliacem, which 
is well represented in Pacific North America ; and he had 
to consider how the genera and higher groups should be disposed. 
This led to a wide study of the order and a strict 
scrutiny of the American species ; and the present " Bevision 
of the North American Liliacese," occupying the greater part 
of the " Contribution " before us, is the result. It is generally 
agreed that this order is to have the wide extension 
which was given to it by the present writer a dozen and more 
years ago ; and the proper collocation of its diversified forms, 
with interlaced affinities, has been a problem of no small difficulty. 
Mr. Baker, in England, has attempted the task for the 
order generally, and has sedulously elaborated some of the 
North American, but more of the Old World and the South 
American, genera and tribes. His arrangement and his systematic 
views are in many respects satisfactory, in some unsatisfactory 
as respects North American botany. Mr. Watson 
has the latter primarily in view, but still has to adjust the 
American genera into the general system. The arrangement 
he has planned consists of three series, the first of which parts 
into two subseries, and includes sixteen tribes, some of them 
divided into subtribes. The great endeavor has evidently 
been to make natural groups — and this endeavor has been 
really successful. The next thing is to assign characters, and 
here comes the difficulty. Absolute characters of the lead- 
1 Contributions to American Botany, IX. By Sereno Watson ; Proc. 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Boston, 1879. (American 
Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xviii. 313.) <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:50:47 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

nearer the fact than would be supposed, as the cells of the 
ovary actually do taper up into the subulate style (as it has 
always and most naturally been termed), so that in the mature 
capsule the upper tails of the seeds reach up to within a 
short distance of the small stigma. 
In a linear order it has not been practicable to approximate 
the Convallariem of the first series with the Uvulariem 
of the second. The division of Uvularia gives a gratifying 
opportunity of dedicating a New England genus to the memory 
of one of the best of New England botanists, the late 
William Oakes ( Oahesia scssilifolia, with its relative of the 
southern mountains, O. puberulaP) ; but he would not have 
relished the dismemberment of the Linnsean genus upon the 
characters, good as they are, neither in fact do we. The 
formation of the tribe Yuccem, of Yucca and Hesperaloe', 
strikes us as excellent ; and it seems right not to adopt the 
supposed second species of Hesperaloe until it is better 
known. Its principal distinctions (longer anthers and shorter 
style) may indicate heterogone dimorphism, which would be 
a novelty in the order. 
Tribe Nolinem, of the first series, must be regarded as an 
excellent group, composed of Dasylirion and Nolina ; and it 
is gratifying to find that the outlying genus Nolina, founded 
long ago on a single Georgian species, is the northern representative 
of a considerable Texano-Mexican group, named 
Beaucarnea. It were to be wished that the plan of this Bevision 
had allowed more citation of generic synonymy, and 
that it had been more explicitly stated that Beaucarnea is only 
Nolina. This union, indeed, is one of the happy hits of the 
present monograph. 
As has been suspected, the Californian Schmnolirion album 
of Durand proves to be quite distinct from the Atlantic 
species on which that genus was founded. So Mr. Watson 
has embraced the opportunity, here offered, to dedicate a 
peculiar Californian genus to Judge Hastings — a judicious 
patron both of botanical and legal learning. Except for his 
exertions, his own liberality, and his direction of the liberality 
of others, we could not have had the " Botany of California, 
WATSON ON NORTH AMERICAN LILIACEM. 281 
which Mr. Watson may now soon bring to a completion. 
The reader finds no mention of this under the genus Hastingsia, 
p. 217, nor under the species H. alba, p. 242. But 
an appropriate reference is made on p. 286. 
Leucocrinum, Nutt., was conjectured by Endlicher to be 
the Mexican Weldenia, but it has just now been ascertained 
at Kew that Weldenia is a Commelynaceous genus. 
Our species of Allium as now worked out by Mr. Watson 
with great painstaking, are thirty-six in number, exclusive of 
the introduced A. vineale. Some characters might be made 
more of in living plants, such especially as those furnished by 
the so-called " crests of the ovary." In A. stellatum these 
crests are remarkably developed, radiating from around the 
base of the style and recurving, the notch at the end of each 
fitting over the base of the alternate filaments, and the under 
side is nectariferous and attractive to bees. The flowers are 
proterandrous. 
In separating the two species of Maianthemum we should 
have unhesitatingly referred the large Pacific coast form to 
M. bifolium. We should not have distinguished Tillium 
Grayi as more than a form of B. Canadense, one which 
extends northward to the central parts of New York. In 
view of geographical range, size, and general appearance, we 
should never have thought of Uvularia flava as a synonym 
of JJ. grandiflora. Mr. Watson finds good characters in the 
shape and markings of the capsule to separate U. grandiflora 
from U. perfoliata. Has any one ripe fruit of the small, 
yellow-flowered U. flava ? 
Ghammlirium Carolinanum, Willd. This specific name 
is properly restored. It was the original name under this 
genus ; and the name luteum is a false one (though the plant 
was Veratrum luteum of Linnaeus), the blossoms being white 
without a tinge of yellow, duller white in the female plant, 
pure white in the male, the pedicels equally of this color. 
No space is left in which to notice the Notes upon the 
Affinities and Geographical Distribution of Tiliacem, nor the 
Descriptions of some New Species of North American Plants, 
about fifty in number, which make up the second part of 
this important "Contribution." Among them is a new 
Bolandra and a new Sullivantia from Oregon, both very 
much like (we fear too like) the original species. Here and 
in the Bibliographical Index, the name Sullivantia Ohionis 
is changed (perhaps accidentally) to S. Ohioensis. We 
knew of no law against genetive names of geographical more 
than of other places or stations, and such are not extremely 
uncommon. The name Ohionis was purposely chosen, and 
we hope may be retained. 
The interesting new Erigoneous genus Hollisteria, discovered 
by the enthusiastic Mr. Lemmon (in San Luis Obispo 
County, east of the Coast Eange), is of rather doubtful interpretation 
as to some points of structure. The inflorescence 
we suppose to be only seemingly axillary, the involucre is 
possibly a genuine trimerous one, and we take the two small 
stipule-like leaves to be real stipules, — a point which the 
published character does not decide, though it is implied in 
describing the leaves as alternate. 
Being one of the most important of recent contributions to 
North American Botany, this publication deserves even a 
fuller notice than we can here give it. 
DE CANDOLLE'S PHYTOGRAPHY. 
Valuable as the present volume l is, it may very probably 
not be translated into English. So we propose to give a running 
account of its contents, adding here and there some brief 
comments, critical or otherwise. Treatises like this can be 
written only by botanists of long experience ; and long experience, 
founded upon good training and accompanied by 
good judgment, gives the right to speak with a certain authority, 
particularly upon writing and publication in systematic 
botany, in which rules and method are most important. De 
ILa Phytographie, ou V Art de decrire les Vegctaux consideres sous 
differents points de vue. Par Alphonse De Candolle. Paris, 1880. 
(American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xx. 150, 241.) 
Candolle is now one of our oldest systematists, one who as 
editor as well as author has had to consider every sort of phytographical 
question ; and the volume he has here produced is 
a needful supplement to the "Philosophia Botanica " of Linn;eus 
and the " Theorie Elementaire " of the elder De Candolle, 
the two classical books which the serious botanical student 
should early and thoroughly master. Phytography has 
to do with form and method in botanical works ; and natural 
history is nothing if not methodical. Its advancement by 
research and its educational value — which will be more and 
more appreciated as it is better taught — ■ both depend upon 
correct morphology and upon well-settled method. Those 
who will not use its proper language and respect its customs, 
must not expect to be listened to, any more than is unavoidable. 
Observation and interpretation must go together, if 
either is to be of value ; the naturalist must not only observe 
that he may describe, but describe if he would observe. In 
his preface De Candolle remarks upon the peculiar advantage 
of natural-history study in the combination of observation 
with judgment, and upon the importance to a student of 
acquiring a clear idea of what natural groups are, what a 
natural classification and the subordination of groups really 
mean, and how a naturalist arranges, names, and with precision 
defines the immensely numerous objects of his study. 
Men who have distinguished themselves in various professions 
and lines of life, have owed the advantage they have derived 
from this kind of training in youth, even though they never 
became naturalists. 
De Candolle's book is in thirty chapters, many of them 
short and somewhat discursive, and generally abounding in 
recommendation and advice, rather than laying down positive 
rules. 
The first chapter glances at "the evolution of botanical 
works " from Cesalpino, with whom scientific botany began 
in the middle of the sixteenth century, to Linnaeus, whose rules 
and spirit still govern, and to our own times, noting the gradually 
increasing importance of herbaria as compared with 
botanic gardens. The second chapter touches upon the moral 
and intellectual dispositions necessary in botanical work, and 
asks the question what manner of men botanists are or ought 
to be. As their pursuits do not lead to fortune, and professorships 
are neither numerous nor well paid, he concludes 
that botany is just the science for disinterested people to 
prosecute from pure love of knowledge and the pleasure of 
discovering something new ; that it does not deal with questions 
of a very high order, nor require very difficult or absolutely 
rigorous reasoning. The faculties which it brings into 
requisition are the spirit of observation and of order, sagacity, 
and a certain good sense in the appreciation of facts ; that, if 
it does not shine with great eclat, at least the faults of its 
cultivators are not likely to harm any one ; that, equally with 
the other sciences, it tends to elevation of character in that it 
requires an ardent love of truth, reposing as it does upon the 
idea that the veracity of its cultivators is absolutely complete. 
He concludes: "Les sciences jouent dans le monde le role 
d'une ecole practique de bonne fob D'apres ces reflexions, 
il est permis de penser que les botanistes sont ordinairement 
et devraient etre toujours des hommes paisibles, inoffensifs, 
indulgent pour les erreurs de leur confreres, et occupes bien 
plus de l'avancement de la science que de leurs interets ou de 
leurs petites glorioles. . . . Ne nous arretons pas cependant 
sur de rares exceptions. La presque totalite des botanistes 
est pene"tree du sentiment de la justice et des convenances. 
On en trouverait difficilement un seul qui ne reconnut le 
principe fondamental de ne pas faire a autrui ce qu'on ne 
voudrait pas qui vous frit fait." 
Still, our author continues, sometimes the perfectly honest 
and right-minded botanist may have failings. He may, for 
example, neglect to cite his predecessors, or cite them inexactly, 
either from negligence (not to speak of calculated omissions, 
which show want of honesty and soon bring down 
reprobation), or from the want of literary resources. The 
latter case may be deemed a misfortune, and no fault. But, 
our author rejoins, if he has not the necessary books within 
his reach, why not go where they are and consult them ? Or 
if unable to do that, why need he publish? 
Some good advice follows about polemics and captious criticism 
; which we pass over, as seemingly superfluous, so long 
as the botanists are almost without exception such peaceable 
and good people. Something is said of the need of a right 
appreciation of the extent of the science ; of the danger of 
exclusive devotion to a single branch of botany, in which one 
may lose all just perspective ; and, finally, of what accuracy 
means in natural history as distinguished from mathematical 
exactness. Everywhere the naturalist has to judge as well as 
to measure. 
The third chapter discourses upon the manner of preparing 
and editing botanical works, and the most advantageous modes 
of publication, considers the different degrees of publicity: 
for instance, complete and durable publicity is attained when 
a Monograph of an order or genus, a Flora, a Species, or a 
Genera Blantarum is published and placed on sale by the 
booksellers ; or when an article or memoir is contributed to 
any leading and well-known botanical journal, or to the bulletin 
of a purely botanical society, which publishes with some 
regularity and indexes its volumes ; or when printed in the 
transactions or bulletins of any scientific society, if separate 
copies in sufficient number are printed and fairly distributed 
or placed on sale. The usage in some learned societies of 
paging each memoir separately and placing it separately on 
sale is referred to, with implied commendation. Let us add 
that in all such separate issues, the original pagination of the 
volume should be scrupulously preserved ; and it were better 
that there should be no other. Less complete, but durable 
publication is that of oitvrages de luxe, so limited in number 
of copies, and so high in price, that only a few libraries can 
possess them; also articles in journals without full indexes, 
or with indexes only to a series of volumes. 
Incomplete publicity is given when papers upon botany are 
inserted in the voluminous transactions of general learned 
societies, of which few individuals can possess the series or 
find room for them ; also articles in reviews, encyclopaedias, 
and the like, treating of many or of all sciences. Even journals 
of natural history alone fall under the ban, unless divided 
into separate parts for zoology and botany, —as is the longcontinued 
" Annales des Sciences Naturelles " of Baris, and the 
" Journal of the Linnaean Society of London." A remedy or 
alleviation of these obstacles to publicity, and of others like 
them, is supplied by the catalogue of papers published by the 
Eoyal Society of London ; which noble work was instigated 
by the late Brofessor Henry ; yet, as this embraces all sciences 
and fills a goodly series of volumes, it can seldom be in the 
library of botanists. 
In speaking of the obstacles to scientific publicity which 
are interposed by too limited editions, high prices caused by 
undue luxury in plates, and inopportune or inappropriate 
media of publication, De Candolle refers to customs in the 
book trade and in government patronage which need reform ; 
and mentions incidentally what a botanical library costs. He 
says there should be by the side of every great herbarium and 
every considerable botanic garden, a special botanical library, 
without which it is impossible to determine exactly the plants 
of the one or the other, or to write any good Monograph or 
Flora. Such a library costs fifty or sixty thousand francs (ten 
or twelve thousand dollars), and needs about 12,000 francs 
for annual purchases. He asks how many such establishments 
there are in the world, and concludes that there may perhaps 
be between ten and twenty. 
The section on the comparative superiority of certain kinds 
of works, sets forth the greater value of books or systematic 
works as compared with memoirs or articles. 
The language to be employed in botanical publications is 
the topic of a special article. For descriptions, Latin, and the 
Latin of Linnaeus. "Le Latin des botanistes n'est pas cette 
langue obscure et a, reticences de Tacite, obscure et a periodes 
pompeuses de Ciceron, obscure et a, graces tortilEes 
d'Horace, qu'on nous fait apprendre au college. Ce n'est pas 
meme le langage plus sobre et plus clair d'un naturaliste tel 
que Pline. C'est le Latin arrange par Linne a I'usage des 
descriptions et, j'oserai dire, a, I'usage de ceux qui n'aiment 
ni les complications grammaticales, ni les phrases disposees 
sens dessus dessous, ni les parentheses enchassces dans les 
phrases." 
This for descriptions, except in local Floras, where popular 
use demands the vernacular ; and we interpose the remark 
that English botanical language, freely incorporating as it 
does all Latin and Greek terms, comes next to Latin in convenience, 
compactness, and facility to all foreign botanists, 
who, being familiar with Latin, can seldom be at a loss. For 
discussions and reasonings, the botanists of each nation prefer 
their vernacular tongue; but De Candolle would restrict them 
to the four modern languages, one or two of which, beside his 
native tongue, every naturalist is nowadays supposed to be 
able fairly to read; English, German, French, and Italian. 
Indeed, De Candolle recommends Latin and the technically 
descriptive style even for generalia, on the ground of brevity ; 
and he aptly suggests that the less capable botanists are of 
handling other than Linnaean Latin, the more brief, sententious, 
and strictly to the point their exposition will be. 
Hints are given as to the best mode of collecting literary 
material, making and preserving notes (each upon separate 
slips of paper) ; upon the importance of adding clear explanations 
of drawings at the time they are made ; and upon the 
desirability of refraining from publication until the work is 
thoroughly completed, but of then publishing as soon as possible. 
A manuscript work is said to have its maximum value 
at the moment of completion. Our author declares that second 
and third editions are seldom equal to the first. That 
depends. He objects also to posthumous publication, citing 
Boxburgh's " Flora Indica," published by Wallich, Plunder's 
plates, published by Burmann, and the wretched figures of 
Velloso ; and he might have referred to the ill-advised printing 
of Griffith's rough notes and comments. But all depends 
upon the character of the manuscript and the length of time 
which has elapsed. 
Chapters IV-XI traverse the whole subject of descriptions, 
under various aspects and a rather minute division of topics. 
As even a brief analysis would overpass available space, we 
will merely touch here and there upon certain points. 
As to the relation of varieties to species, there are two 
modes of presentation, both of which have been followed by 
Linnaeus, and by most systematists, upon different occasions. 
Varieties are commonly designated by the small letters of the 
Greek alphabet, a, B, y, etc., and also by names when they are 
pretty distinctly marked. Either the varieties, one or more, 
may be appended to the species (that is, to the form taken as 
the type, which usually must be the form originally described 
under the name), and therefore be treated as aberrant forms; 
or else the species is characterized as a group of forms, which 
forms are classified and defined just as species are under their 
genus. For instance, Mentha Canadensis is held to comprehend 
both a hairy and a smooth form, the two differing also 
somewhat in other respects. Linnaeus founded the species on 
the former ; and it is pretty well agreed that we are to refer 
the species back to him, however it be limited. Now we 
may either give a common character to the species, and then 
distinguish var. a. villosa, and var. B. glabrata ; or we may 
characterize the species in general upon the originally named 
form, and append the variety (3. glabrata. Either mode has 
its advantages and is likely to be employed in certain cases. 
The former classifies the varieties under the species, perhaps 
more naturally, and exhibits the polymorphous character of 
what we call a variable species ; and De Candolle considers 
that it will prevail in proportion as the forms of a species 
come to be well known ; the latter holds closer to the bibliography. 
There is danger of some misunderstanding when 
the two modes are used in the same work. In the " Synoptical 
Flora of North America," the former mode is invariably 
adopted, partly on the score of brevity. Either the originally 
described form, or a medium or common form is taken as the 
type, and the varieties are treated as departures from this. 
Even when the specific character is drawn so as generally to 
cover the varieties (as should be done as far as possible), 
some form, and the history of the species generally indicates 
what form, is kept in view as the norm or alpha. Of course, 
except for cultivated plants, there is no knowing and no pretence 
of determining which was the parent form, or in what 
order the several varieties may have diverged from a pristine 
stock. 
As De Candolle points out, there is much ambiguity and 
looseness in the use of this word " type," which it would be 
well to avoid. Properly the type of a species is the species or 
genus, or the full idea of it, which no one individual or species 
may embody, which in the case of a group no single representative 
or member can fully exemplify. To apply the term to 
a form which well exemplifies the essential characters of the 
species or genus is quite natural, and hardly involves any 
confusion. But the term is also used in a historical sense, 
as referring to the particular form on which a species was 
founded, or the species on which the genus was characterized 
or which its founder had mainly in view, but which very often 
proves not to be the best representative of the group, sometimes 
not even a fair one. Finally a particular specimen 
which the original author described, or an authentic specimen, 
is said to be a type, or a typical specimen ; and this De Candolle 
objects to. But after all, such terms can hardly he held to a 
single sense in technical any more than in ordinary language. 
Something must be left for the context to determine. 
In drawing up the characters of groups, such especially as 
orders and genera are exceptions or what we call exceptions to 
be indicated in the character ; or shall this express only what 
is generally true ? De Candolle discusses the question, but 
leaves it, as must needs be, for practical judgment to determine. 
On the one hand the point or the usefulness of a character is 
blunted or dissipated by the intercalation of alternatives and 
exceptions, yet characters must be somehow made to correspond 
with the facts. The method of Bentham and Hooker, 
of a separate specification of the principal known exceptions, 
is commended. 
Should outlying or anomalous groups be incorporated with 
the orders they most resemble, or be merely appended as 
" genera affinia," and the like ? The latter was inevitable in 
the earlier days of the natural system ; but increasing knowledge, 
as well as considerations of symmetry and convenience, 
more and more fix the place of these floating groups ; so that 
their general incorporation into the orders by Bentham and 
Hooker in the Genera Plantarum of our day is in the natural 
course of things. But botanists have to remember that many 
of them are still riddles. 
De Candolle classes descriptions under the two general heads 
of developed and abridged. A developed description is a 
detailed account of the whole conformation, without regard 
to differentiae. The type of an abridged description is the 
diagnosis, such as the specific phrase, or as Linnaeus called it, 
the nomen specificum ; what we now universally term the 
specific name being his nomen triviale. In the course of 
phytography both these have become rare or of special use 
as regards species, and a hybrid between the two has been 
engendered which is more serviceable than either. The long 
and independent descriptions of the olden time are now seldom 
written. Except for special cases, the development of the 
natural system in its subordination of groups in ever increasing 
numbers and definiteness, has rendered them superfluous. 
What was once stated in the developed description of a species 
in one formula, and a vast deal more, is now parceled out 
among the ordinal, tribal, generic, sub-generic, or sectional, 
sub-sectional, and other characters, each of which deals primarily, 
if not wholly, with diferentim. The characters of each 
grade, being diagnostic, may be comparatively short ; but 
taken together they become almost exhaustive. But to avoid 
going again over the same ground, subsidiary matters not 
diagnostical, yet needful or useful, are not rarely intercalated 
among the more essential points, instead of being collected in 
a separate paragraph. Consequently the specific diagnosis 
may be prolonged and get to partake of the nature of a 
developed description. The remedy for over-length is to 
multiply divisions and sub-divisions between the genus and 
the species. To do this well, to arrange the species group 
within group most definably as well as most naturally, tasks 
the powers and the patience of a systematic botanist, and tests 
his aptitude for discerning affinities, and solving practical 
difficulties. 
Developed descriptions are in place in such general works as 
De Candolle's " Systema " (which was soon overweighted and 
crushed by them), and above all in monographs of orders or 
genera. In his sixth chapter, devoted to this topic, the author 
cites, in order of date, the principal monographs of orders or 
tribes (excluding those of a single genus) which maybe taken 
as models (about two dozen only), and points out some of 
their merits or defects. The subject of abridged descriptions 
is taken up in chapter VIE ; and this connects itself with a 
great number of subsidiary questions and particular details, 
running on through twenty chapters more (individually short), 
and forming the most practically useful part of the book. 
There are so many points which it were well to call attention 
to, or sometimes to comment upon, for which space is now 
wanting, that we must defer the remainder of this critical notice 
to the next issue of the Journal. 
It is to be regretted that, for the completeness of this work, 
the author did not comprehend in it the subject of nomenclature 
of groups — an important part of phytography — and 
reprint in it his opuscula, entitled " Lois de la Nomenclature 
Botanique," along with some further commentaries, such as 
his experience and some adverse criticisms from an opposing 
school may have suggested. This may still be desired, 
although the little treatise has already been widely disseminated 
in three languages, and although, as the author incidentally 
remarks, his own view is shared by an immense 
majority of descriptive botanists. 
We proceed with our remarks upon this interesting volume, 
taking up certain points as they strike attention in turning 
the pages, but passing over many others of equal or superior 
importance. 
There is a short chapter upon enigmatical descriptions or 
botanical riddles, and how they come about. The author has 
taken the pains to collect and tabulate the " species dubise " 
of the last four volumes of the "Brodromus," to see who 
is accountable for them, taking into account only botanical 
authors no longer living, and excluding those who have contributed 
no more than three. So good a botanist as Blume 
heads the list, one so indifferent as Siebold is accountable for 
the fewest ; so not much comes from such a tabulation. The 
practical point is that Blume, as well as Miquel and Kunth, 
who stand high on the list, have fallen much into the habit of 
founding species on fragmentary or quite insufficient herbarium 
specimens ; instead of passing them over without mention, 
or at least without naming them. One is apt to suppose 
that a description of an incomplete specimen, say without flowers, 
may be readily eked out later by another hand supplied 
with the missing parts. This, as De Candolle says, is a mistake. 
The succeeding botanist is hindered more than he is 
helped by such work. And it is the same with species founded 
on figures, such, for instance, as those of Mocino and Sesse, 
upon which the elder De Candolle established species and 
some genera in the earlier volumes of the "Prodromus." As 
to " genera dubia vel non satis nota," very few can be laid 
at the door of first-class botanists. In the list of names of 
deceased botanists which are notable for their absence, the 
name of Torrey is inserted between that of the elder De Candolle 
and that of the elder Hooker. 
In the chapter on the description of groups superior to 
species, the author enumerates; and sketches the character of 
the six " Genera Plantarum " which have appeared within the 
180 years of modern botany ; the immortal works of Tonrnefort 
(" Institutiones," 1700), Linnasus (the first edition of whose 
" Genera " was published in 1737), A. L. Jussieu (1789), 
Endlicher (1836-1840), Meisner (1836-1843, which is much 
less known), and finally of Bentham and Hooker, which began 
in 1862, and is now three quarters finished. Tournefort fixed 
the rank and character of genera, Linnaeus tersely and clearly 
defined them, Jussieu arranged them under natural orders, 
defining these, Endlicher and Lindley developed the hierarchy 
of groups superior to orders, also the tribes inferior to 
them, and the latter is deservedly praised for his sagacity in 
discerning affinities, the former for the perfection of his style ; 
and to Bentham and Hooker is justly awarded the crowning 
merit of having, far beyond their predecessors in this century, 
verified or developed the characters of the genera by a wide 
and direct study of the herbarium materials. 
Floras, or descriptions of natural groups, not in their 
entirety but so far only as represented in a particular country 
or region, are discussed in chapter X. In Floras, as in more 
general works, abridged descriptions or diagnoses suffice, 
indeed are preferable in all cases where the region has 
been pretty well explored, and where the materials can be 
thoroughly elaborated. Formerly all considerable Floras were 
written in Latin, at least the characters. So they would continue 
to be if the convenience of botanists and the advancement 
of science only were to be considered. But Floras are 
used by many to whom even Linnaean Latin would be a 
stumbling-block. Fortunately the difference between good 
botanical English and botanical Latin is not wide, and will 
not seriously trouble a French or German botanist. The 
converse hardly holds. The greatest Flora written in English 
we might say the best great Flora in any language which has 
ever been produced and completed, is Bentham's "Flora 
Austrahensis," in seven octavo volumes. Touching upon 
works of special illustration, the " Botanical Magazine " is 
justly singled out for praise, for sustained botanical correctness 
under difficulties, and for its great influence upon the science. 
De Candolle insists much on the importance of describing 
and well classifying the varieties of a species, and of distinguishing 
them as much as possible into grades, such as subspecies 
or races, varieties, subvarieties, etc. We suggest that 
this can be done with great advantage only when the forms 
are comparatively definite, or have been described as species. 
We think that only the more salient and definite varieties 
should be distinguished by names ; otherwise the names and 
the groups will be limitless. 
In the eleventh chapter, on partial descriptions of groups 
from the point of view of organography (a term which our 
author prefers to morphology), of physiology, botanical geography, 
etc., our author has some pertinent remarks upon the 
helps which all such studies are offering to phytography, 
which will gradually extend its domain over them ; and upon 
the obvious advantage and great need of having results of 
histological researches expressed descriptively, under something 
like a common terminolog}^ and with due regard to 
rules which have governed the more matured branches of 
botany, — rules and practices which eliminate a deal of verbiage, 
facilitate comparison of views, and ensure mutual intelligibility. 
Of botanical descriptions for the purposes of 
systematic botany, it could be said that whatever is not clear 
is not botany. May such clearness be hoped for in the future 
of histological botany ? 
Chapter XII. treats of the unavoidable mixture of artificial 
with natural grouping. Truly natural groups are often artificially 
defined, that is, are indicated by single characters ; 
or truly artificial characters are used for the sake of convenience 
in the division of natural groups. Of the latter 
sort are the divisions Polypetalm, Gamopetalm, and Apetalm 
in Dicotyledons ; also those founded on the mode of curvature 
of the embryo in Cruciferm, introduced by Brown, who 
cautiously used them for genera, but raised to the rank of 
primary or subordinal characters by De Candolle. Hypogyny, 
perigyny, and epigyny are in the same category, and probably 
no one was more sensible of it than Jussieu himself, whose 
point and forte was the constitution of orders, not their collocation 
under these artificial heads. De Candolle suggests 
that, while to the more natural divisions are appropriated the 
terms of Class, Cohort, Orders, Tribes, Genera, and Sections ; 
such names as Division, Subdivision, Series, etc., might be 
restricted to artificial divisions, and that these should take 
adjective names not of generic origin, such as Bigulifiorm, 
Polypetalm, and the like. 
Chapter XIII. relates to difficulties in phytography which 
have grown out of various methods or absence of method in 
the nomenclature of organs, and from the want of consideration 
of the law of priority in such matters. The result of 
which in some departments, such as histological morphology, 
is a state of anarchy not unlike that which prevailed in the 
names of groups before the days of Tournefort and Linnaeus. 
We may hope that order and lucidity will some day dawn 
upon this chaos and a common language replace this confusion 
of tongues. Meanwhile De Candolle offers certain counsels, 
the utility of which, he says, is not doubtful nor the application 
very difficult. 
(1) Hold fast to common and universally known names, 
whether in Latin or in modern languages. Radix, caulis, 
folium, flos, etc., with their vernacular equivalents, are not 
to give place to new-fangled substitutes. This, he thinks, will 
rid us of " such useless terms as caulome, phyllome, etc." 
Now these terms, along with trichome, seem to us legitimate 
and useful, as succinct expressions of a morphological idea ; 
they are annoying only when pedantically ridden as hobbies 
over ground on which they are not wanted. 
(2) Do not entertain the idea that a change in the mode 
of considering or defining an organ requires a change of 
name. Although Limueus did take the leaf-blade for the 
leaf, and define it accordingly, that did not much hinder the 
coming in of a truer view, involving merely a change of the 
definition. But one may intimate that De Candolle here 
comes into conflict with another rule he insists on, namely, 
that terms should have unmistakably one meaning. When 
we say — as we ever shall — that leaves are ovate, we speak 
according to the Linnaean definition ; when we say that their 
insertion is alternate, we use the word in a more comprehensive 
sense ; when we have occasion to declare that cotyledons, 
bracts, petals, etc., are leaves, we use the word in the most 
comprehensive sense. All this involves considerable ambiguity 
; and the endeavor to keep the new wine in the old 
bottles causes no little strain. It is borne because it has 
been applied gradually. If Linnams had started with, or 
even reached our ideas, we should happily have had a nomenclature 
to match. Now we must be content, for descriptive 
purposes, to employ some words both in a restricted and in 
a comprehensive sense, and let the context fix the sense, just 
as it must in ordinary language. Technical precision is only 
a matter of degree. But it is clear that the excellent rule 
here laid down need not forbid the introduction of terms to 
express our conceptions, such as rhizome, caulome, trichome, 
and the like. Yet these are ill-chosen terms, except the last. 
In particular, rhizoma has long ago been appropriated for 
something which is not of root nature, but the contrary. 
(3) The third counsel is to change the name of an organ, 
as we do that of a genus or species, only when it is positively 
contrary to the truth, or when it has been pre-occupied. 
(4) Avoid giving special names for rare or ill-definable 
cases of structure. An epithet or short periphrasis is vastly 
preferable to a new and strange term, which will be seldom 
used and may be hardly understood. De Candolle truly remarks 
that after a great multiplication of terms and distinctions 
generally comes some good generalization, which does 
away with a crowd of particular names ; that what has happened 
in carpology is likely to occur for microscopic organs ; 
and he adds: "Nous assistons au 'feu d'artifice' d'une 
trentaine de noms de ces etats des cellules " [in our vernacular, 
we have seen them "go up "] ;"il en restera seulement 
quelques-uns generaux ou frequents, qui seront toujours 
necessaires." 
(5) Between two or more names choose, not the most 
agreeable, or even the most significant, but the one best 
known and most widely recognized. 
(6) Between names equally known and used, adopt the 
oldest. Which are the older names is not difficult to know 
in the case of common organs, but is very much so in modern 
histology. -j i 
(7) In this matter of priority or of usage, consider only 
names taken from [or in conformity with] Latin or Greek. 
As in systematic botany, scientific and not vulgar names are 
to be accounted in this regard. Those who like spaltoffnung 
for stoma or stomate, and scheitelzelle, must needs follow 
their own fashion ; but the genius of our own and the French 
language resists their importation, while it adopts or adapts 
with ease technical terms from classical sources. 
(8) Not to admit names contrary to these rules. 
Chapter XIV. surveys some difficulties in phytography 
which arise from the variant, changed, or contradictory use 
of certain botanical terms, and from the employment of 
vernacular terms which cannot be latinized. The latter has 
just been referred to incidentally. Even the French describe 
the dehiscence of a certain kind of capsule as "en boite a 
savonette." In English we do not attempt to say "in soap- 
box fashion," and should not be understood if we did, but we 
adopt the Linnaean Latin " circumcissile." In general, De 
Candolle concludes that a vernacular term, whether the name 
of an organ or of a botanical group, which will not enter into 
a Latin text by a modification of its termination, is not scientific, 
and may give place to one which is. 
A few terms are mentioned which have been more or less 
changed in meaning since the time of Linnaeus ; such as 
lanceolate, which has gradually varied more or less, and for 
a part of the change the present writer is held to account ; 
also glaucus, which classically means sea-green in hue, but 
which has been generally used in botany to designate sometimes 
a certain whitishness, and sometimes a whitishness 
caused by a minute waxy exudation in the form of a powder : 
the latter is the same as pruinosus. Others may be as surprised 
as we were to learn that neither glaucus nor pruinosus 
are Linnaean terms. 
Among the terms used ambiguously, it is surprising that 
De Candolle does not refer to pistillum, first introduced into 
botany by Tournefort, and used in the sense of the modern 
term gynmcium, therefore only one to a flower ; modified by 
Ludwig to denote a female member of the flower (having 
ovary, stigma, and commonly a style), of which there may be 
several or many in a flower ; and adopted in the latter sense 
by Linnauis, yet generally with a use that avoids contradicting 
the sense of Tournefort. Mirbel, Moquin-Tandon, and St. 
Hilaire among the French, have openly departed from Tournefort's 
use, and speak freely of pistils in the plural. Brown 
and De Candolle have used the word in the manner of Ludwig 
and Linnaeus when they have used it at all, but have generally 
evaded its use ; other botanists, especially British, have gone 
back to the Tournefortian sense of gynoecium. The present 
writer has a note on the subject in the new edition of his 
" Structural Botany " (1879 and 1880), p. 166. 
Sinistrorse and dextrorse in the direction of ascent of 
climbing stems or the overlapping of parts in a bud, etc. — 
De Candolle had formerly insisted upon the desirability of 
following what he takes to be the authority and practice of 
Linnaeus in the use of these terms ; and he here returns to 
the subject, reinforcing his former arguments. It is most 
desirable that these terms should not continue to be employed 
in contradictory senses, one party calling that sinistrorse 
which the other calls dextrorse; it is also fitting that the 
principle of priority should prevail and that the authority 
of Linnaeus should be respected. Let us, therefore, in the 
first place give an abstract of the points which De Candolle 
here makes. 
But first, we take it for granted that a stem or such organ, 
having no front or back, can have no right or left of its own : 
so when we say that it twines to the left or right, we can 
mean nothing else than the right or left of the observer. The 
contradiction comes from the different position which the 
observer is conceived to occupy. De Candolle supposes the 
observer to be placed within the coil or ascending helix, and 
that this is the more natural position. The other party supposes 
the observer to face the object from without ; and from 
this position the Hop twines to the left, i. e., turns in ascending 
from the observer's right to his left, while the Convolvulus 
turns from his left to his right ; the first is sinistrorse, 
the second dextrorse ; while to De Candolle, standing within 
the coil, the first is dextrorse, the second sinistrorse. Now, 
says De Candolle, Linnaeus in the first edition (1751) of the 
"Bhilosophia Botanica," § 163, page 103, says: " Sinistrorsum 
hoc est quod respicit sinistrum, si ponas te ipsum in 
centro constitutum, meridiem adspicere ; dextrum itaque contrarium." 

De Candolle remarks that the phrase "meridiem adspicere 
" is of no account [but it indicates a certain confusion 
in Linnaeus's mind], for it matters not in what direction you 
look. He adds — what we had all overlooked — that in the 
errata, on p. 360, Linnaeus corrected the word sinistrum into 
dextram. But, inasmuch as two editions of the " Bhilosophia 
Botanica " were printed at Vienna in Linnaeus's lifetime, and 
this correction was not introduced into them, he concludes 
that the correction was cancelled by the author of it. And he 
notes that the expression " sinistrorsum hoc est quod respicit 
dextram " is a most awkward one for denoting the right-about 
change which the erratum had in view. Nevertheless the 
correction was so made in the edition of the "Bhilosophia 
Botanica " by Gleditsch in 1780, two years after the death of 
Linnaeus, also in that of Willdenow, published ten years later. 
But De Candolle the elder, in the " Flore Francaise," and in 
all his writings, followed the original text, as also has the 
present De Candolle, who cites as maintaining the same view 
Braun (who for a time gave way to the opposite), Bischoff, 
Mohl, Balm, Dutrochet, Naegeli, and even Darwin. But we 
should say that Darwin, noting the conflict of views, had carefully 
evaded both, using instead the expression " with the sun, 
and against the sun" ; yet sometimes saying " from left to 
right," as equivalent to "against the sun" (as on p. 34), 
showing that he took the external position to be the natural 
one. 
Among those who have used the terms sinistrorse and dextrorse 
and defined them in the way which supposes the observer 
to stand outside of the helix, are Aug. St. Hilaire, 
Duchartre, Bentham and Hooker, Eichler ; and the present 
writer may be added, although our author appears not to be 
aware of it. While trusting that the younger botanists will 
follow the example of Linnaeus and the majority of authors, 
De Candolle recommends that those who depart from it, and 
even those who adopt it, shall state their point of view by 
some convenient abbreviation, such as extus vis. or intus 
vis. ; and thus lessen the danger of a misunderstanding. 
This is indeed essential. 
De Candolle remarks that he can discover no reason for the 
ab extra point of view except a tacit but perhaps nowhere 
expressed assumption that it requires some effort to suppose 
one's self in the centre of a helix or spire. He thinks a moderate 
effort will accomplish this. The reply may be that, in 
the case of a stem climbing a hop-pole, or of the scales imbricated 
on the axis of a jjine-cone, or of a flower-bud on the 
stage of a dissecting microscope, the contemplation of the 
object from without calls for no effort at all. So natural does 
this extraneous position appear to be that we found ourselves 
describing these objects from that point of view without thinking 
of any other, —so natural, as we shall see, that Linnaeus 
fell into it himself, and there remained. Yet, that the opposing 
view has also its fitness is obvious from the fact that the 
physicists and mathematicians are divided in usage, no less 
than the naturalists. 
In the actual state of the case, the question which view 
ought to prevail in botany must be determined therefore on 
a balance of considerations : 1, Priority and authority, such 
as that of Linnams ; 2, Naturalness ; 3, Preponderant actual 
usage. We had maintained in this Journal (for March and 
for May, 1877) and in " Structural Botany " (6th ed., note 
on pp. 51, 52) that the externe visum view has decidedly the 
best case on the second ground, and, except in botany, on the 
third also. And now that De Candolle has drawn our attention 
to the matter, we are going to claim the remaining ground 
likewise, and to contend that the contrary usage in botany 
came in from non-attention to the teaching and practice of 
Linnaßus himself. 
On p. 39 of Linnaeus's only own edition of the " Bhilosophia 
Botanica" he defines and illustrates the directions of twinino 
thus : " Sinistrorsum, secundum solem vulgo : Humulus, 
Helxine, Lonicera, Tamus. Dextrorsum, contra motum solis 
vulgi; Convolvulus, Basella, Phaseolus, Cynanche, Euphorbia, 
Eupatorium." 
Nothing is said about the position of the observer. But 
in every one of the examples of sinistrorse (Helxine being 
Polygonum convolvulus), the stem winds around the support 
passing from right to left of the observer confronting the coil; 
and in every one of the dextrorse examples (Eupatorium 
being Mikania) it winds in the opposite direction. That is, 
dextrorse and sinistrorse are used in the externe visum sense. 
On p. 103 the same is repeated, except that reference to the 
sun's apparent course is omitted and additional examples are 
added, most (but not all) of them accordant with the preceding. 
So far, it would seem that Wichura was not mistaken 
in his statement that De Candolle had followed a different 
method from that of Linnaeus. And this appears to be the 
whole case as respects direction of twining. 
But on the same page, to " Corolla sinistrorsum " is appended 
the foot-note which has made so much trouble, namely, 
" Sinistrorsum hoc est, quod respicit sinistrum, si ponas Te 
ipsum in centro constitutum, meridiem adspicere ; Dextrorsum 
itaque contrarium." That is to say, in defining the direction 
of overlapping of the parts of a perianth, Linnaeus took the 
open flower instead of the bud, and proposed to look down 
upon it from above or within. Now it may well be that Linnaeus 
subsequently perceived the contradiction between his 
terminology for overlapping and that for twining ; and that 
his brief erratum, on p. 310, " pro sinistrum lege dextram," 
was intended to bring the former into congruity with the latter, 
which it does, but in an awkward way. Perhaps he saw 
the incompatibility of the cited examples ; in fact, about as 
many of them accord with the outside as with the inside point 
of view. Any way, the erratum is his own ; it seems unlikely 
that he authorized its omission from the Vienna editions ; and 
Gleditsch and Wifldenow should not be blamed for heeding 
his behest in their editions. For, so far as it goes, it tends to 
render their author consistent with himself. If Linnaeus had 
revised the page himself, he would have left out the " meridiem 
adspicere," which has nothing to do with the matter, 
and doubtless he would have completed his assimilation of 
the direction of petal-obliquity or overlapping with that of 
stem-winding; and so the whole confusion from which we 
are endeavoring to escape would have been avoided. 
In adopting the external point of view — now fortified by 
original authority —it is well to note that we shall be in 
accord with the modern physicists and mathematicians, and 
also with common people. The ordinary screw, on which the 
thread winds from left to right of the confronting observer, 
and which is driven home by the semi-rotation of the hand 
and fore-arm from left to right, is everywhere known as the 
right-handed screw ; and this, with the corkscrew, is taken as 
the norm and exponent of right-handed rotation by Clerk- 
Maxwell (" Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism," i. 23), 
and by Sir Wm. Thomson. 
The analogies which have been adduced in favor of the 
inside position are mostly drawn from objects which have 
a right and left of their own ; a building, for instance, has 
a right and left side or wing because it has a front and a rear. 
The right side of an assembly presided over by an officer who 
faces the members is quite arbitrarily, but naturally, taken to 
be that on the right of the chairman. But the right-hand 
figures on a drawing or engraved plate are taken to be those 
on the right hand of the observer, notwithstanding that the 
plate, having face and back, has a right and left of its own. 
Chapter XV. refers to certain difficulties which grow out 
of ambiguous terms of ordinary language ; for example, the 
various meanings of the word (fin) end or purpose, and the 
ambiguities in the use of the terms nature, natural, supernatural 
(which lead off into philosophy, but are here treated 
rather in reference to style of exposition) ; also the change 
which has occurred in the scope of the word history in natural 
science. 
Chapter XVI. is an interesting and pertinent one, upon the 
manner in which facts observed under the microscope are 
described, and on the great saving of space and advantage 
in clearness which would be gained by the adoption, for all 
matters perfectly capable of it, of the Linnaean descriptive 
style, and of Linnaean Latin. Extracts from the German of 
Schacht, the French of Payer, and the Italian of Gasparrini 
are given, and by their side a rendering in descriptive Latin ; 
and the words and letters are counted. The German specimen 
so treated is diminished to considerably less than half the 
number of words and a little less than half the number of 
letters. The French simmers down to one third the number 
of Latin words and less than half the number of letters ; and 
in the French of descriptive botany to less than one half. 
The Italian extract of 51 words and 256 letters is expressed 
in Latin of the Linnaean form by 21 words and 127 letters. 
Style in botanical works is discussed in chapter XVIIL, 
which all young botanists should study, especially the portion 
which treats of the admirable style of Linnaeus. In speaking 
of botanical style in the modern languages, the author notices 
the great advantage which the languages of Latin stock have 
inherited, and which the English-writing botanists have acquired, 
of ready and free use of Latin and latinized technical 
words by direct transference. Botanical French, English, 
and Italian, are contrasted with the German in this respect. 
Noting that the German of conversation inclines to be clear 
and sententious, while in botanical writings the words lengthen 
more and more and the sentences become badly involved, our 
author remarks that recently having read a couple of pages of 
Vegetable Anatomy, and feeling his brain somewhat fatigued 
with the frequency of such words as Sclerenchymfasergruppen, 
Gefassbundentwicklung, and Entwicklungseigenthiimlichkeit, 
he asked himself if that was good German style. 
He then recollected that Goethe, one of the very greatest of 
German literary writers, was also a profound naturalist. He 
opened his "Metamorphose der Pflanzen," read a page or so, 
and experienced a relief which he likens to that felt by a seatossed 
ocean voyager when the vessel suddenly glides into 
a quiet harbor. 
Chapter XIX. discusses the propositions to employ letters 
and figures, chosen arbitrarily or otherwise, to represent specific 
and generic characters, — repulsive contrivances, to which 
our author lends no countenance. 
Chapter XX. treats questions of orthography, abbreviations 
and signs, pagination, typography ; the twenty-first chapter, 
of titles and indexes ; both full of interesting details upon 
which we cannot touch, although we are longing to put in 
our oar. 
Chapter XXII. animadverts upon the tendency of certain 
modern cryptogamists to set all botanical rules at naught. 
The next gives advice about articles in journals, dissertations, 
and the like ; the next treats of translations ; another, of figures, 
and has many noteworthy remarks ; chapter XXVL, of 
auxiliary and bibliographical works ; and chapter XXVII. is 
a chronological table of the progress of phytography, beginning 
with a Chinese encyclopedia 1000 years before Christ, 
and ending with Sachs's " Lehrbuch," 1868-1877. Botanical 
students will find it very interesting and instructive. 
The remaining chapter begins the second part of the vol- 
ume, " Breuves des Descriptions ; " which is principally devoted 
to herbaria, their history, formation, and management ; 
— a most important chapter, the analysis of which would 
form an article by itself. Last in order and not least in importance, 
a full enumeration is given of botanical collectors 
and authors who have formed herbaria, with an indication of 
the place where their herbaria or collections are preserved. 
DARWIN'S POWER OF MOVEMENT IN PLANTS. 
First let us congratulate the scientific community, no less 
than the author, that Mr. Darwin's experimental researches 
are seconded, and are we hope long to be continued, by the 
son whose name appears upon the title-page, and whose independent 
papers already published approve his worthiness 
for that honor. This volume 1 is from beginning to end a 
record of a series of researches and of the inferences which 
they directly warrant. Naturally it will not fascinate the 
general reader after the manner of "The Origin of Species" 
and some of the volumes which succeeded that epoch-marking 
production ; nor has it the fresh charms of the treatises "On 
the Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants," and of 
" Insectivorous Plants," of which it is the proper continuation 
and supplement. 
The organs of plants take certain determinate positions 
and execute certain movements, some of them universal or 
general, some of them special, some of them very striking and 
seemingly strange, most — but not quite all of them — evidently 
advantageous to the plant or essential to its wellbeing. 
Roots point toward the earth ; stems point away from it ; 
young stems bend toward the light, and the upper face of 
leaves is presented to it. Stems that twine " circumnutate ' 
(a capital term), i. e., bend successively to all points of the 
1 The Power of Movement in Plants. By Charles Darwin, assisted by 
Francis Darwin. With illustrations. London and New York, 1880. 
(American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxi. 245.) 
compass, and this wholly irrespective of external influences ; 
and the twining around a support is the direct consequence 
of the circumnutation. Most tendrils freely circumnutate, 
and thereby are enabled to reach the object which they p-rasp. 
Most tendrils (and in certain cases some other parts) are 
very obviously sensitive to external contact or irritation to 
which they respond by movement and change of form and 
thus they grasp or do other advantageous acts. Some movements, 
especially of leaves, occur with regularity upon the 
access of light, others with its withdrawal ; a few, such as the 
small leaflets of Desmodium gyrans, proceed irrespective of 
night and day. The specification need not be extended. The 
general facts in all their great variety are familiar to scientific 
readers. The inquiry of this volume is as to their ground 
and origin, or, as in this connection we should rather say, 
their development and history. For instance, circumnutation 
gives rise to twining and gives efficiency to other ways of 
climbing. But Darwin is bound to suspect, and even to show, 
that circumnutation is not a special endowment of the stems 
and tendrils of climbing plants, but rather a more developed 
manifestation of a general faculty. And the same is to be 
said of the movements of tendrils and leaves, or their appendages, 
whether automatic or in response to external irritation 
or stimulus. All this is what the experimental researches 
detailed in this volume undertake to ascertain and have satisfactorily 
made out. 
An abstract of the volume might be somewhat tedious, and 
is certainly unnecessary for biological readers, who are sure 
to possess and study it. But the gist is readily to be gathered, 
without running through the iterated details or scanning 
many of the illustrative and curious figures which record the 
movements under investigation, by the simple perusal of the 
introduction and of the concluding chapter, in which the matter 
of the volume is summed up. 
The sum and substance of the case is, that all these powers 
and faculties are manifested in the seedling immediately upon 
germination, and most of them are then remarkably exemplified. 
The caulicle or initial portion of stem below the 
cotyledons (with the elongation and protrusion of which the 
germination of dicotyledonous seeds usually begins) circumnutates 
as soon as it comes out into the open air, and even 
earlier : this is the earliest manifestation of an automatic 
movement which is shared by all the succeeding portions of 
stem developed from it, in the early life of most plants, 
whether climbers or not. In the latter, and especially in 
twining plants, we see this general faculty at its maximum 
and in beneficial exercise. More remarkable and novel it is 
to learn that the initial root, growing from the lower end of 
the caulicle (not inaptly called by Darwin the hypocotyl), also 
shares in this faculty of circumnutation. As it penetrates 
the soil in its downward course, it cannot largely manifest 
this faculty, and indeed its power of circumnutation is always 
small ; " but the circumnutating movement will facilitate 
the tip entering any lateral or oblique fissure in the earth or 
a burrow made by an earth-worm or larva ; and it is certain 
that roots often run down the old burrows of worms. The 
tip, however, in endeavoring to circumnutate will (successively) 
press against the earth on all sides, and this can hardly 
fail to be of the highest importance to the plant " (being supplemented 
by another faculty, that of sensitiveness at the tip 
presently to be mentioned) ; for " when the tip encounters a 
stone or other obstacle in the ground, or even earth on one 
side more compact than on the other, the root will bend away 
as much as it can from the obstacle or the more resisting 
earth, and will thus follow with unerring skill the line of least 
resistance." Then, beside the almost universal heliotropic 
movement, by which each leaf or leaflet presents its superior 
surface to the direction of the greater light, Mr. Darwin 
shows that these organs also circumnutate, beginning even 
with the cotyledons or seed-leaves ; although their sweeps generally 
form so narrow an ellipse that they move up and down 
in nearly the same vertical plane, a movement describing a 
circle being converted into one up and down. 
These circumnutatory movements are of the most fundamental 
and therefore mysterious character. Although most 
commonlv connected with growth, they are at bottom inde- 
pendent of it. This — contrary to some German physiologists 
— we must conclude from both DeVries' and Darwin's 
investigations. They are produced by the changing tumescence 
of the cells on different sides of a stem or footstalk, 
which may or may not be fixed by some consequent growth 
or solidification. This Mr. Darwin, we presume rightly, concludes 
to be the faculty or susceptibility upon which heliotropism, 
geotropism, and the like (not to speak of apheliotropism, 
apogeotropism, paraheliotropism, diaheliotropism, hyponasty, 
nyctotropism, and other terms which the incautious student 
may take to be powers instead of abbreviated expressions) — 
in other words, upon which the solar rays and some occult influence 
of the earth — act, modifying the sweeps or converting 
them into forth and back or other special movements. Amonothese, 
that which has been termed the sleep of leaves, better 
and briefly designated by the word nyctotropism, is thoroughly 
investigated in this volume, and is shown to be far 
more general than has been supposed ; and the conclusion is 
that the end subserved is a needful protection of the surfaces, 
mainly of the superior surface against cold from nocturnal 
radiation. A priori, looking at the structure of the leaf, one 
would have thought that the under surface had the greater 
need of such protection. 
Not only are all these movements incipient in the seedling, 
but some of them are manifested more rapidly and extensively 
than in most mature plants. This should needs be, since, as 
Mr. Darwin states it, " Seedlings are subjected to a severe 
struggle for life, and it appears to be highly important to 
them that they should adapt themselves as quickly and as 
perfectly as possible to their conditions." Very properly, 
therefore, no small part of this volume is devoted to the seedling 
and to the behavior of its several parts. The most novel 
and unexpected results relate to the young root. Judging 
from its simplicity and from the medium in which it is developed, 
one would not look there for the endowment which 
Mr. Darwin finds in it. But this root-tip and the vegetable 
cells which compose it conspire to teach us that the most simple 
structures may be wonderfully gifted. The tiny root ex- 
hibits three kinds of movement : first that of circumnutation, 
in which, endeavoring to bend in all directions, its tip " will 
press on all sides, and thus be able to discriminate between 
the harder and softer adjoining surfaces, . . . and to bend 
from the harder soil and follow the lines of the least resistance," 
so modifying advantageously its course from that to 
which geotropism constantly tends to give it. Moreover, the 
Growing- end of the root is sensitive to contact, and in a complex 
manner. If pressed above the tip, it bends there toward 
or around the impinging body, much as the end of a tendril 
bends around a support : thus it may follow, as roots do, along 
the unequal surface of a solid body. But, thirdly, if the tip 
itself be locally pressed, it exhibits different and more surprising 
sensitiveness, for it transmits an influence to an upper 
adjoining part, causing it to bend away from the affected side. 
This sensitiveness to contact is confined to a little more than 
one millimeter of the tip ; the part which bends is 6or 7 or 
even 12 millimeters above. So, when the sensitive tip in its 
downward growth strikes obliquely upon a stone or other obstacle, 
the part above at this distance, to which some influence 
must be transmitted, bends and carries the point away from 
the obstacle. Yet later, when a new portion of the side impinges 
upon the stone or other body, it will bend at that part 
toward instead of away from it, and so follow along its surface. 
It is the tip, likewise, that can discern that the air is 
moister on one side than on the other, and which thence " transmits 
an influence to an upper adjoining part, which bends 
toward the source of moisture." It is the tip only which is 
sensitive to gravitation. Well may Mr. Darwin affirm that 
there is no structure in plants more wonderful, as far as its 
functions are concerned, than the tip of the radicle. Also, 
that "it is impossible not to be struck with the resemblance 
between the foregoing movements of plants and many of the 
actions performed unconsciously by the lower animals." " But 
the most striking resemblance is the localization of their sensitiveness 
and the transmission of an influence to an excited 
part which consequently moves. Yet plants do not of course 
possess nerves or a central nervous system ; and we may infer 
that with animals such structures serve only for the more perfect 
transmission of impressions and for the more complete 
intercommunication of the several parts." The closing sentence 
of the book may be appended to this. "It is hardly an 
exaggeration to say that the tip of the radicle, thus endowed 
and having the power of directing the movements of the adjoining 
parts, acts like the brain of one of the lower animals." 
The movements " excited by light and gravitation," as well 
as the nyctotropic or sleep-movements so called, are (as we 
have already stated) all referred by Mr. Darwin to modified 
circumnutation, "which is omnipresent while growth lasts, 
and after growth has ceased whenever pulvini are present," 
as in several classes of leaves. As respects the relation of 
external agents to the movements, note Mr. Darwin's remark 
: " When we speak of modified circumnutation we 
mean that light, or the alternations of light and darkness, 
gravitation, slight pressure or other irritants and certain innate 
or constitutional states of the plant, do not directly cause 
the movement ; they merely lead to a temporary increase or 
diminution of those spontaneous changes in the turgescence 
of the cells which are already in progress." 
Certain parts of plants turn or grow earthward. When 
this is attributed to gravitation, as it commonly is, the physicists 
have opportunity to complain of the misuse of a term. 
Although Mr. Darwin, like other writers, speaks of the influence 
of light and of gravitation in the same breath, without 
discrimination, we note with satisfaction his disagreement with 
those who "look at the bending of a radicle towards the 
centre of the earth as the direct result of gravitation," and 
note especially the closing dictum. "Gravity does not appear 
to act in a more direct manner on a radicle than it does 
on any lowly organized animal, which moves away when it 
feels some weight or pressure." Why, we would ask, need 
the word gravity or gravitation be used at all in this connection 
? 
The introduction to this volume contains a short article 
upon the terminology which is adopted in it, chiefly as regards 
such words as epinasty and hyponasty, geotropism and 
related terms, which is most convenient to employ, and also 
the names of these several parts of the embryo and seedling. 
This is, we believe, almost the first English book in which the 
axial part of the dicotyledonous embryo below the cotyledons 
(the radicle of the systematic botanist even of the present 
day) is distinctly recognized as hypocotyledonous or initial 
stem, although on the continent and in America this has long 
been taught and accepted. None the less so although the 
term radicle has been retained for it (until recently by the 
present writer, at least), in order not to break with the terminology 
of systematic works. Mr. Darwin, in this volume, 
shortens the expression of " hypocotyledonous stem " into the 
term " hypocotyl," — a fairly good English term, certainly 
better than the French tigelle. The objection to them both is 
that the words will not take the substantive Latin form, as all 
such terms should. Wherefore the better name —an old one 
which we have reverted to in the last edition of the Botanical 
Text-book (Structural Botany) —is caulicle or cauliculus. 
The initial root, which grows from the lower end of the 
caulicle (or " hypocotyl "), Mr. Darwin calls the radicle, following 
in this the ordinary English usage, except in very 
definitely distinguishing it from the cauline part above it. 
Being simply root, we have preferred uniformly to call it so, 
thus avoiding a word which the systematists have all along 
applied to the caulicle. Although initial stem and initial 
root are most clearly discriminated in the present volume, yet 
in the accounts of the germination or the ordinary Dicotyledons, 
it appears to be implied or stated, either that it is the 
root-part which first projects from the seed-coats and that the 
stem-part begins its development later, or that the axial part 
of the embryo conspicuously preexisting in the seed is root 
and not stem. We take it to be quite otherwise, namely, 
that this axial part in the seed is cauline, and that ordinarily 
it protrudes or makes some growth in length before root-for- 
mation begins. 
A few misprints of names of plants will in no wise mislead 
or trouble any botanist, except possibly in the case of Apiumgraveolens, 
which on p. 422 and 424, and in the index, is 
printed Apios. 
DE CANDOLLE' S ORIGIN OF CULTIVATED PLANTS. 
M. Alphonse De Candolle' s " Geographic Botanique 
Baisonnee," in two volumes of nearly 700 pages each, was 
published in the year 1855, and has been for several years 
out of print. It is not surprising that the now venerable but 
still well-busied author should decline the labor of preparing 
a new edition, involving, as it would, the re-discussion of certain 
questions under changed points of view, and the collocation 
of a vast amount of widely scattered new materials which 
the last quarter of a century has brought to us. 
Happily, the chapter on the geographical origin of the 
species of plants generally cultivated for food, and for other 
economical uses, could be detached. This, the author has 
sedulously studied anew ; and the present volume ■ is the result. 
As yet we have it only in the original French ; but it 
is said that an English translation is in preparation. So, if 
the work is not already in the hands of botanists and other 
scholars generally, we may expect that it soon will be ; and, 
contenting ourselves with a mere mention of its plan and 
scope, we may proceed to remark, here and there, upon points 
which strike our attention. 2 We may expect this to be for 
1 Origine des Plantes Cultive'es. Par Alphonse De Candolle. Paris, 
1883. (Bibl. Scientifique Internationale, XLIII.) (American Journal of 
Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxv. 211, 370 ; xxvi. 128 ; with J. Hammond 
Trumbull.) 
2 To avoid repetition, it may be mentioned here that, in the following 
annotations, the "Relations of the Yoyages " of Columbus are cited 
from Navarrete's " Coleccion de los Viajes, " etc. (Madrid, 1858, and 1827-37) 
; references to Peter Martyr d'Anghiera's first three Decades " De 
Rebus Oceanicis et Novo Orbe " (written before 1517) are to the Cologne 
edition of 1574 ; references to Oviedo's " Historia General y Natural de las 
Indias " — of which the first nineteen books, published in 1535, included a 
revised and enlarged edition of his " Relacio sumaria de la Nat. Historia de 
!as Indias," printed in 1526 — are to the edition published by the Royal 
Academy of History of Madrid, 1851-55 ; Jean de Lery's " Histoire 
d'un Voyage faict en la terre du Brasil " (in 1557-8) is referred to in his 
revised edition in Latin, " Historia Navigations in Brasilian " (Geneva;, 
1586) ; Fr. Hernandez, "Nova Plantarum, etc., Historia," in the edition of 
many years the standard work upon the subject, and to 
undergo revision in successive editions ; and we are sure that 
the excellent author will welcome every presentation of discussion 
which may chance to throw any new light upon the 
sources or the aboriginal cultivation of certain plants which 
the Old World has drawn from the New. 
The first part of the volume, of only 22 pages, is mainly 
occupied with a consideration of the means employed for the 
determination of the sources whence the various cultivated 
plants have been derived. The botanist enquires where a 
given cultivated plant grows spontaneously, or what was its 
wild original; and he has to judge, as well as he can, where 
it is truly indigenous or where a reversion from a cultivated 
to a wild condition. This, as respects weeds and the like, is 
a difficult matter, even in a newly settled country like North 
America, much more so in the Old World ; but as respects 
the plants of agriculture, the case is usually simpler. The 
botanists resident in a country are not likely to be far misled 
by the occurrence of wilderings ; but, in the case of travelers 
and collectors, perhaps too much has been made, even 
in this volume, of plants only once met with growing spontaneously, 
and inferred to be indigenous. Blentifulness is 
of no account, else the Century plant and Opuntia would be 
thought indigenous to the Mediterranean region, the Ox-eye 
Daisy to the United States, and certainly the Cardoon to the 
Pampas, where there is now probably more of it than anywhere 
in the Old World. Archajology and palaeontology 
are often helpful, as by the identification of fruits and seeds 
in ancient Egyptian tombs, or of paintings upon their walls, 
or of fragments in ancient bricks ; or the debris of lakedwellings 
rescued from lacustrine deposits, as in Switzer- 
Rome, 1651 ; " Rariorum Stirpium Historia " by L'Ecluse (Clusius), in 
the first edition, Antwerp, 1576 ; his " Exotica," including his translations 
of Monardes and Acosta, Antwerp, 1605, with his " Cura Posteriores ' 
(posthumous), 1611. —J.H. T. _ _ 
II va sans dire — yet should explicitly be said — that all the historical 
and philological lore, which gives this article its value, is contributed 
by my associate. — A. G. 
land ; and from the tufas of southern France, the kiokenmoddings 
of Scandinavia, the mounds of North America, and 
the ancient monuments and tombs of Mexico and Eeru. Historical 
documents are also important for the date of certain 
cultures in particular countries ; and here it is stated that 
the principal cultures have come from three great regions, 
namely: China, southeastern Asia and Egypt, and intertropical 
America. De Candolle also remarks that in the Old 
World agriculture was developed along rivers, in the New, 
upon plateaux, — a fact which he attributes to the primitive 
situation of certain plants worth cultivating. But this is not 
quite obvious. Linguistic learning may be turned to much 
account ; as in tracing a plant toward its home by the name 
which has gone forth with it in all its migrations. Like other 
instruments this must be used with some knowledge and judgment. 
Ble de Turquie (maize) did not come from, and 
probably not by way of, Turkey, any more than did the 
animal of that name. Jerusalem Artichoke has naught to 
do with Jerusalem, but came from North America, and is no 
artichoke. Pomme d'Acajou, anglice Mahogany-apple, is 
neither an apple nor a pomaceous plant, nor has it anything 
to do with mahogany. New Zealand Flax came indeed from 
New Zealand, but is not a flax. Among errors from the 
careless transference of names from one plant to another, 
that of Potato, which belongs to the Batatas or Sweet Potato, 
is familiar. Of mistakes which have been made in the transference 
of a popular name from one language to another, 
De Candolle mentions the Arbre de Judee of the French, 
which in English has become Judas-tree. We may add that 
of Bois fidele, of the French West Indians, which, taken up 
by their English successors as Fiddle-wood, has been perpetuated 
in the generic name Citharexylum. 
The several lines of evidence — botanical, archaeological, 
palaontological, historical, and linguistic — may be used to 
supplement or correct each other. How they may be brought 
to bear, and how their combination may give satisfactory 
results, is practically shown in Fart 11, —a study of the species 
as regards their origin, their earliest culture, and the principal 
facts of their dispersion, — which makes up the principal bulk 
of the volume, namely, from page 23 to page 350. 
This part is divided into chapters, e. g., Plants cultivated 
for their subterranean parts, such as roots, bulbs, tubers, etc. 
Those cultivated for their herbage, whether for human food, 
for forage, for fibres, for stimulation, etc.; but the proper 
medical plants are left wholly out of view, as likewise plants 
cultivated for ornament. So the chapter on plants cultivated 
for their blossoms, or parts connected with these, is brief 
enough, treating as it does only of the Clove, Hop, Safflower, 
and Saffron. For the Eose, Acacia Farnesiana, and all plants 
however largely cultivated for perfume or for essential oils are 
left out of view. So also are the sweet-herbs of the kitchengarden, 
and all condiments, except Horse-radish. Plants cultivated 
for their fruits and seeds occupy the closing chapters. 
Among the latter the Cotton-plant is placed. The arrangement 
matters little, and that adopted may be the most convenient. 
A good index makes ready reference to any topic. 
In the order of the book we come first to Helianthus tuberosus, 
the Topinambour of the French, Jerusalem Artichoke 
of the English ; in the United States the tubers simply called 
artichokes. Almost all we know of the origin and source of 
these esculent tubers has been recovered since the publication 
of De Candolle's earlier work, in 1855. Although the contemporary 
accounts specified its introduction from Canada, 
and Linnaeus so cites it in the " Plortus Cliffortianus," the subsequent 
reference to Brazil was followed without question 
down to De Candolle's " Prodromus " ; and the present author, 
in the work above mentioned, doubted the Canadian as well 
as the Brazilian origin. It now appears that Schlechtendal 
(in Botanische Zeitung, 1858) was the first to recover a part 
of the documentary history. Our own article on the subject 
—to which there is nothing of importance to add — was contributed 
to this Journal for May, 1877. 1 Singularly, it has 
1 In it reference was made to Lescarbot's mention of roots "grosses 
comme naveaux . . . ayans un gout retirant aux cardes," etc., and cited 
his " Histoire de la Nouv. France," in the edition of 1612 (p. 810). In a subsequent 
edition (1618), cited by M. De Candolle, Lescarbot adds that he 
remained unknown to De Candolle, although it is referred to 
at the close of Decaisne's independent and exhaustive article, 
in the " Flore ties Serres," 1881. 
It can now be said that the wild plant to which Helianthus 
tuberosus has been traced is not IT. doronicoides, Lam., 
although it was confounded with that species in Torrey and 
Gray's " Flora." Lamarck's plant is a sessile-leaved species. 
Decaisne's remark that IT tuberosus is the only species of 
the genus which is at all tuberiferous may be qualified. A 
form of what appears to be PH. giganteus, but is not yet very 
well known, grows in Minnesota and the Saskatchewan region, 
has been mentioned by Douglas under the name of " Indian 
Potato " of the Assiniboine tribe, by Bourgeau as "H. subtuberosus," 
in herb. Kew, and by Dr. C. C. Parry in Owen's 
Minnesota Eeport, page 614, under the name of 11. tuberosus. 
The scanty tubers which we have seen in dried specimens do 
not compare well with those of IT. tuberosus ; and that species 
has never been found wild so far north (that Ave know of), 
not even in the most southern parts of Canada West. The 
aborigines who cultivated it must have obtained it from the 
valleys of the Ohio and Mississippi and their tributaries, 
where it abounds. 
had brought these roots into France, where they began to be sold under the 
name of Topinamboux, and that their Indian name was Chiquebi. On this 
last point, Lescarbot was wrong. Chiquebi was an eastern Algonkin name 
for the tubers of Apios tuberosa, the common "groundnuts," — not for 
those of Helianthus tuberosus. It is easy to see how Lescarbot was misled. 
Father Biard's " Relation de la Nouv. France " was printed in 1616, and 
in it (chap. 22) there is mention of certain ' ' racines, appellees en Sauvage 
Chiquebi," which grow spontaneously under oaks : " elles sont comme des 
truffes, mais meilleures, et croissent sous terre enflees I'une a I'autre en 
forme de chapelet," etc. Lescarbot doubtless caught the name from Biard, 
and misapplied it. Father Paul Le Jeune (Relation, 1634, chap. 7) mentions 
these ground-nuts, " une racine que nos Francois appellent des chapelets, 
pource qu'elle est distingu^e par nceuds en forme de grains." Lescarbot's 
" Topinamboux " indicates a popular belief, in France, in the 
Brazilian origin of H. tuberosus. The Tupinamba Indians of Brazil — a 
division of the Tnpi-Guarani family — had been allies of the French in 
the sixteenth century, and their name was probably well known in France 
through the relations of J. de Lery and other voyagers. Lescarbot 
(Histoire de la Nouvelle France, 1612, p. 178) follows Lery in writing 
the name " Tououpinambaoult." — J. H. T. 
Helianthus annuus, L. — the history of which was almost 
equally confused, and which we had identified with a widespread 
species of the western United States — is omitted by 
De Candolle, yet might claim a place : for Decaisne, who has 
treated it at length in the paper above cited, informs us that 
a form of it (called " Bussian Sunflower ") is cultivated in 
Bussia for the oil of its large seeds, and, if we mistake not, for 
fattening poultry. Our Indians also cultivated it for the oil 
of the seeds, which they used for greasing their hair, also for 
eating and other purposes. Champlain noted this (in 1610?), 
and Sagard about a dozen years later. 1 The latter says (Histoire 
du Canada, 1736, page 785) : " lis font estat du tournesol, 
qu'ils sement en quantite, en plusieurs endroits a cause de 
l'liuyle qu'ils tirentde la graine," etc., piously adding: "Mais 
comment est-ce que ce peuple sauvage a pu trouver I' invention 
de tirer d'une huyle que nous ignorons, sinon a l'ayde de la 
divine Brovidence." The wild original of this Sunflower must 
1 Champlain's earlier record of the cultivation and use of the Sunflower 
is essentially like that of Sagard, and both relate to the same stations, 
namely, the Huron towns near the southeastern point of Georgian Bay. 
This Champlain reached by way of the Ottawa (R. des Prairies) and Lake 
Nipissing. The lamented Decaisne has here introduced some confusion 
into the history, which we hasten to rectify. In his article in the "Flore 
des Serres" (xxiii. p. 108, p. 2 of the pamphlet), he says, " Je trouve 
dans Champlain l'observation suivante (Voyage Nouv. France, r&mpress. 
1830, torn. i. p. 110) : " 
" En remontant le St. Laurent et avant l'arriver au Lac Ontario, je 
visitai cinq des principaux villages ferule's de palisades de bois, jusqu'a 
CahiagueV' etc., and so on to the mention of the " grande quantite' de bled 
l'lnde (Mais) qui y vient tres beau, comme aussi des eitrouilles. Herbe des 
soleil, dont ils font de l'huile, de la graine de laquelle ils se frottent la 
tete." 
This, the latitude of 44.50° being stated, would refer Cahiague" and the 
Sunflower cultivation to the neighborhood of Ogdensburgh and Preseott, 
far away from the actual place (the Indian town mentioned being the 
Huron name of the mission station of San Jean Baptiste, in what is now 
Simcoe Co.), and it introduces a palpable anachronism, Ontario having 
been an unknown name in Champlain's time. In fact, there is nothing 
answering to the early part of this pretended quotation, either in the original 
of Champlain or in the edition here cited by name and page. The 
excellent Decaisne could never have tampered with the quotation himself. 
He must have taken it at second hand and neglected to verify it. 
have been obtained by the Canadian Indians from beyond the 
Mississippi, and some degrees farther south. Judging from 
the breadth of the flower-heads soon after its introduction into 
Europe, it must in aboriginal hands have assumed much of 
the abnormal development which distinguishes the cultivated 
Sunflower from its wild original of the western plains. 
Solarium tuberosum, L. • — The question of the Potato was 
fully discussed by De Candolle in 1855 ; and the present 
review of it only confirms the now generally admitted conclusions. 
These are summed up in the statements, that the plant 
is spontaneous in Chili under a form quite identical with the 
cultivated species, that its aboriginal cultivation had extended 
as far north as New Granada, but apparently no farther ; that 
allied tuberiferous species, which our author regards as distinct 
(though others partly doubt it) are found along the 
Andes and through Mexico, and within the borders of the 
United States ; that when known in Virginia and North Carolina 
in the second half of the sixteenth century, it was not 
derived from our Indians ; and that it was carried to Europe 
first by the Spaniards between 1580 and 1585, and afterwards 
by the English. 
Batatas vulgaris, Choisy, Convolvulus Batatas, L., the 
Sweet Potato, is one of a few cultivated plants which have attained 
to a very wide distribution over the warmer parts of the 
world in early times ; and it is one which no botanist pretends 
to have seen in a truly wild state. The evidence inclines 
to an American origin ; but it had reached the Pacific islands 
in prehistoric times, and was cultivated in China in the second 
or third century of our era. De Candolle states that — 
" Clusius, one of the first to speak of the Batatas, says that 
he had eaten it in the south of Spain, where it was said to 
have come from the New World. He indicates the names of 
'Batatas,' 'Amotes,' 'Ajes.'" 
The testimony of Clusius (L'Ecluse) to the American origin 
of the Sweet Botato, though not of the highest value, might 
be more strongly stated. He visited Spain and Portugal in 
1066. The first edition of his " Historia Eariorum Stirpium " 
was printed in 1576, and contains the description of Batatas 
which M. De Candolle cites from the edition of 1601. He 
gives a figure of the plant, of which, he says, he had observed 
three varieties growing in the south of Spain. He states 
their American origin, not as a doubtful matter or with a 
" Ton pretendait," but as a well-established fact : " Spontc 
nascitur in novo orbe, vicinisque insulis, unde primum in Hispaniam 
delata est." " Now," he adds, "it is planted in many 
places near the coast of Andalusia ; but those grown at Malaga 
are preferred, and are transported to Cadiz and Seville. 
We sometimes have them fresh in Belgium, but they will not 
germinate here, the country being too cold." As to the name 
—he was as undecided as have been some botanists since his 
time : " the Spaniards call them ' Batatas,' and also ' Camotes 
'or ' Amotes ' ; some also ' Ajes ' ; yet, as they say, they 
differ among themselves, and the root of Batatas may be 
much the sweeter and the more tender." 
This confusion of names dates from the time of Columbus, 
for Clusius was not, by half a century, the first to speak of 
the Batata. (It may be worth noting, in parenthesis, that 
Batatas, the scientific name adopted by Linnaeus, and as the 
name of a genus by Choisy, is the Spanish plural of Batata, 
the aboriginal name.) Even Feter Martyr and Oviedo do 
not agree in all particulars as to the distinction between 
"Ajes " and " Batatas " — a distinction which both recognize. 
In the 9th book of his 2d Decade, written about 1514, Peter 
Martyr (ed. 1574, p. 191), describing the fruits, etc., of the 
province of Uraba, Darien, names, for the first time, Batatae. 
" They dig from the earth," he says, " roots that grow spontaneously 
{suapte natural nascentes) ; the natives call them 
' Batatas ' [accus. plural], which when I saw I thought to be 
rapes of Lombardy [? ' Insubres napos '] or great earth-tubers 
[ Cyclamen Europmum ? Rapum terrm and Tuber terrm of the 
old botanists]. In whatever way they are cooked, roasted or 
boiled, they yield in delicate sweetness l to no confectionery 
or other eatable whatsoever." They are, he adds, "also 
planted and cultivated in gardens." In his 3d Decade (lib. 
1 The sweet potato was an inspiration to Peter Martyr, who rarely indulged 
himself in such a flight as " dulcorata mollities." 
4, p. 240) he mentions " Maize, Yucca, Ages, and Battatse " 
as plants that grew in Honduras when Columbus landed on 
that coast in 1502 ; and in the same Decade (lib. 5, p. 261) 
he names the same four plants as the ordinary food of the 
people of Caramaira (east of Darien) " as of the others," and 
again takes occasion to name the battatas, as surpassing all 
else " mira quadam dulci mollitie — especially if one falls on 
the better sort (nobiliores) of them." 
Oviedo gives a good description of the Batata, which, when 
he wrote (1525-35), was commonly cultivated by the Indians 
in Hispaniola and elsewhere, and highly prized (Historia, lib. 
vii. c. 4). It resembles the " Ajes," he says, in appearance, 
but tastes better and is far more delicate. The leaf is more 
notched {harpadcF) than that of the "Age," in nearly the same 
fashion. Some varieties are better than others, and he gives 
the names of the five kinds which are most highly esteemed. 
[Beter Martyr (dec. iii. lib. 9, p. 302) included the same five 
names among the nine varieties of " Ajes " that he mentioned 
as distinct ; but in this, as in other matters pertaining to natural 
history, Oviedo is the better authority.] " When the Batatas 
are well cured, they have often been carried to Spain, where 
the ships happened to make a quick passage, but more often 
they are lost on the voyage. Yet," adds Oviedo, " I have 
carried them from this city of Saint Domingo, in Hispaniola, 
to the city of Avila, in Old Castile." 
The " Gentleman of Elvas " who wrote the " True Eelation 
" of De Soto's expedition to Florida, in 1538, mentions 
Batatas, then growing in the Island of Terceira (belonging to 
Portugal) . 
Cieca de Leon, who was in Peru in 1547, speaking of the 
fertility of the valleys near the Pacific coast, and the plants 
cultivated by the Indians, names among these, Sweet potatoes 
(Chron. del Peru, c. 66). In the Quichuan language they 
were called " apichu "; in the dialect of Quito, " cumar." Mr. 
Markham, in a note to his translation (Hakluyt Soc, 1864, 
p. 234) mentions, on the authority of Dr. Seemann, " the 
curious and interesting fact that ' kumara ' is also the word 
for Sweet potato in Tahiti, the Fiji Islands, and New Zea- 
land." Garcilasso says these roots " which the Spaniards call 
' batatas ' and the Indians of Peru ' apichu,' " are of four or 
five different colors, etc. " The least good are those that have 
been brought from Spain." 
Jean De Lery found them in Brazil in 1557, and described 
them under their Tupi name — " Hetich," as he wrote it — of 
which " the soil of Brazil is as prolific as that of Limousin or 
Savoy is of rapes." He describes the Indian method of planting 
; yet, " since these roots are the principal article of food 
of this country, and are met with by travelers in various 
places, I judge that they grow spontaneously " (Hist. Navig. 
in Brazil, p. 165). Montoya (Tesoro, 1639) gives the Tupi- 
Guarani name, " Yeti," and mentions numerous varieties. 1 
Monardes, in the third part of his " Simpl. Medic, ex Novo 
Orbe," published in 1574 (translated by Clusius, ed. 1593, 
p. 439), states that Battatas " are now so common in Spain, 
that ten or twelve caravel loads are sent annually from Velez- 
Malaga to Seville." 
De Candolle (who has elsewhere printed a short article upon 
the subject) calls attention to the fact, which ought to be familiar, 
that sweet potatoes are roots, not tubers, and that 
Turpin long ago published good figures illustrating this ; also 
that while these roots are free from acrid or noxious qualities, 
all the Convolvtdacem with tubers, of which there are many, 
and not a few of large size, are inedible and acrid, — mostly, 
as we know, violently purgative. 
Manihot utilissima, Manioc, Cassava-plant. — De Candolle 
assigns good reasons for concluding (as did Bobert Brown, 
without giving his reasons) that this important food-plant of 
the tropics is American, not African. But he leaves unnoticed 
the convincing fact that " Manioc " and " Manihot " 
are Brazilian names, slightly corrupted, of a plant cultivated 
in St. Domingo and Cuba before the landing of Columbus, 
and which became known to Spanish and Portuguese discoverers 
before 1500, by its Haytian name, " yuca," or " hiucca." 
1 Hans Stade, who was a captive in eastern Brazil in 1549, briefly 
mentions these "roots called ' Jettiki,' of pleasant taste." (Captivity, 
Hakl. Soc. ed. p. 166.) 
Peter Martyr (1493) describing the food of the islanders, 
names "lucca, from which they make bread " (Dec. i. lib. 1, 
p. 7 ; ed. 1574) ; in the third book of his second decade 
(p. 148) he mentions lucca, Ajes, and Maiz, as the three 
plants used by the natives for bread ; in the third decade 
(lib. 5, p. 262) he describes the mode of the propagation by 
cuttings, of cultivation, and of the preparation of " Cazabbi " 
from the root ; and he states that " there are many kinds of 
' iucca ' " (p. 263). Oviedo (Historia, lib. 7, c. 2) describes 
" the bread of the Indians that is called ' cagabi,' " which 
is " made from a plant they call ' yuca,' " and he distinguishes 
two species of the plant. Acosta (Hist, of the Indies, transl. 
by E. G. ; Hakluyt Soc. ed., p. 232, 1588-90) gave a good 
account of the plant "yuca," and the kind of bread made 
from it, called " ca9avi." 
Peter Martyr (Dec. iii. lib. 9, p. 301) relates the Haytian 
tradition of the origin of the cultivation of " yuca " in their 
island. " They say that a ' Boitius ' [i. e., magus, or diviner], 
a wise old man, after the lapse of many years, saw, on the 
banks of a river, a plant that was like a cane ; pulling it from 
the earth, he made this wild plant a cultivated one. He who 
first ate the ' lucca ' raw, quickly died. But because its taste 
was sweet, they determined that a way of using it should be 
diligently sought for. When roasted or boiled, it was less 
hurtful. At last they came to the knowledge of the latent 
poison in its juice," etc. 
Gomara (Hist, gen., c. 71), Acosta (Hist. nat. y moral de 
las Indias, 1588-90 ; lib. 4, c. 17), Monardes (De Simplicibus 
medic, transl. by L'Ecluse, 1593, p. 437), and other 
writers of the 16th century gave good descriptions of the 
plant "Yuca," and of the " cacavi " or " cazabi " prepared 
from the root. By the blunder of European editors, in the 
last half of the 16th century, the Haytian name was transferred 
from the plant to which it belonged to one of another 
order, the Yucca of Linnaeus and of modern botany. The 
mistake was pointed out by Lobel. 
Jean de Lery (Hist. Navig. in Brasil. c. 9) describes the 
two species that were cultivated in Brazil in 1557 — under 
their Tupi names, " Aypi " \_M. aypi,Fohl] and " Maniot " 
\_M. utilissima]. Marcgrav (Hist, plant. Bras., p. 65) mentions 
many varieties of both species, and gives " Mandioca " 
as the name of the root ; " Mandiiba "or " Maniiba " for the 
plant. Of the products of the root, Cassava retains its Haytian 
name (" cacavi ") nearly ; Tapioca is a corruption of the 
Brazilian (Tupi) " tipioca " or " tipiocui." 
Dioscorea sativa, alata, etc. Yam. —De Candolle informs 
us that these species, or their allies, are wholly unknown to 
botanists in a wild state ; that, although cultivated in the 
East Indies, they have no Sanscrit names ; that they seem not 
to have been widely cultivated in Africa, but that the authors 
of the 17th and 18th centuries speak of them as widely diffused 
over the south Pacific islands, from Tahiti to New Cale- 
donia and the Moluccas. In the summary they are assigned 
to southern Asia (Malabar? Ceylon? Java?), and to the 
eastern Asiatic archipelago. Although a large part of the 
genus is indigenous to tropical America, it is thought that 
the cultivated species were probably introduced from the Old 
World. The following presentation of the evidence, as concerns 
America, may set the question in a different light : — 
The natives of Cuba and St. Domingo, when Columbus discovered 
those islands, cultivated two kinds of plants for their 
roots. These were called in the language of the islanders of 
St. Domingo, " Ages "or " Ajes," and " Yuca." Neither of 
these plants was known to the Spaniards. About " Yuca " 
there is no question; it was the " Manihot," or " Manioc," of 
which we have already spoken. It is nearly as certain that 
the " Ages " was a species of Dioscorea, to which, in their ignorance 
of the language of the islands, the Spaniards at first 
gave the name of "Name," " Niame," "Inhame," or other 
corruptions of a foreign (probably African) name ; and this 
name seems to have been occasionally misapplied both to the 
" Yuca " and the " Batata." 
L'Ecluse, who had traveled in the south of Spain and in 
Portugal, in 1563, says that the Colocasia (C. antiquorum) 
" first brought from Africa, was common in many places in 
Portugal, near streams of water, that it was sought for by 
negro slaves in Portugal, who ate it both raw and cooked," 
and that it was " called by the Portuguese, following the 
Moors, 'Inhame,' — by the Andalusians, ' Alcolcaz,' " etc. 
(Barior Stirpium Hist., p. 299.) In a note to his translation 
of " Garcia ab Horto " (1574, p. 217), he says that " the 
plant called ' Inhame ' by the Bortuguese has very broad 
leaves, and grows near the water, or in water, — not spontaneously, 
but when once planted it propagates itself from the 
roots," etc. 
Some of the companions of Columbus had seen the " Inhame 
" (or " Name ") in Africa, and were ready to transfer 
its name to the first cultivated roots they saw in America. A 
few days after the discovery of Cuba (Nov. 4, 1492), Columbus 
saw fertile fields " full of ' Mames ' [" these are ' Ajes ' or 
' batatas,' " notes Las Casas], which are like carrots (' Zanahorias'), 
and other plants, including Kidney beans and Beans 
(faxones y fabas) much unlike ours." (Navarrete, Colec, 
i. 200.) These " mames " are mentioned again Nov. 6 (id., 
203) — in both places, probably by an error of the copyist, 
for "niames"; for, the next month, some natives of Hispaniola 
brought "bread of 'niames,' which are roots that 
grow as large as rapes (' rabanos '), which they plant and 
cultivate in all their fields, and on which they live ; and they 
make bread of them, boil them, and roast them ; and they 
have the taste of chestnuts, and no one eating them w r ould believe 
they were not chestnuts " (id., 238). A few days later, 
the Spaniards learned the names of these roots — or of others 
with which they were at first confounded. The Admiral sent 
a present to a friendly cacique. The officer who carried it 
reported, on his return, that " all this island ( St. Domingo) 
and Tortuga are cultivated like the country about Cordova. 
The lands are planted with ' Ajes ' —which are little shoots 
(ramillos) that are planted, and at the bottom of each grow 
roots like ' zanahorias ' which they use for bread," and these 
roots " are very savory, and taste like chestnuts." They have 
them here larger and better than he had seen in any place ; 
for, he said, he had " [seen] such also in Guinea " (id., p. 
242). Again, the natives "brought bread made of 'niames,' 
which they call ' Ajes ' " (id., 251) ; and, Dec. 26, they gave 
the Admiral a " collation, of two or three kinds of ' Ajes,' 
and of their bread that they call ' cazavi,' " etc. (id., 263). 
After this the name of " niames " gives place to " ajes " (or 
" ages "). On the second voyage of Columbus, the natives, 
near Isabella (in St. Domingo), brought great quantities of 
" ages which are like rapes (nabos) very excellent eating," 
and " this age, the natives of Caribi (the Caribbean Islands) 
call nabi, and the Indians [of Hispaniola ?] hage " (id., 368, 
369). 
In two or three of the passages to which reference has been 
made — particularly those in which bread is mentioned — the 
Spaniards seem to have confounded the " ages " with the product 
of the " yuca " (Manihot), or to have included bothunder 
the general name of " niame " (or its equivalents, "Name, 
Igname," etc.) Amerigo Vespucci —or some one of the several 
translators through whom the relation of his first voyage 
comes to us — says, that in 1497, " the common food of the 
natives of Baria was the root of a certain tree (arborea radix 
quaedam), which they reduce to a good enough flour, and that 
some call this root ' lucha,' others ' Cambi,' but others 
' Ignami ' " (Navarrete, Colec, iii. 216) 7 
This confusion of names, in the first decade of discovery in 
America, was natural and unavoidable. The foreign name, 
" niame, igname," was applied without much discrimination to 
roots cultivated by the natives of the islands and the mainland 
— primarily, to "ajes," occasionally to "yuca" (Manihot), 
and perhaps to " batatas." In the relations of the voyages of 
Columbus only two cultivated roots are named — " Ages " and 
" Yuca." The first book of Beter Martyr's first decade (dated 
1493, but probably revised before its publication in 1511) 
names only these two ; and in the third book of his second 
decade he mentions the use of the same two roots by the natives 
1 It is to this passage that Humboldt refers, in " Nouv. Esp.," 2d ed., 
ii. 468 (cited by M. De Candolle, p. 63), as evidence that the name 
" Igname " was heard on the continent of America by Vespucci in 1497 ; 
but, as will be seen, Vespucci (or his copyist) does not say that this name 
was used by the natives. 
of Comagra, in Darien (p. 148) ; but in a subsequent chapter 
(dec. ii. c. 9., p. 191) he adds — as has been mentioned in a 
preceding note — a third kind of roots, which the natives of the 
province of Darien call " Batatas," that grow in their country 
spontaneously. From this date to the middle of the 16th 
century the distinction between these roots, though occasionally 
lost sight of, is generally observed. Oviedo (Historia, 
1. vii. cc. 2, 3, 4, pp. 268-73) describes the " cacabi " and two 
species of the plant (" yuca ") that yields it ; " ajes " ; and 
" batatas." The " ajes," he says, were cultivated in Hispaniola 
and in all the other islands, and on the continent ; they 
were of various colors — white, reddish, inclining to mulberry, 
and tawny, but all white within, for the most part ; the stem 
of the plant extends itself like that of "correhuela" (Convolvulus 
or Bindweed), but stouter; the leaves cover the 
ground, and are shaped much like " correhuela " and nearly 
like Ivy or panda, with some delicate veins ("unas venas 
delgadas"), and the little stems (" astilejos "), on which the 
leaves hang, are long and slender, etc. The leaf of the 
"Batata," he says (p. 274), is more toothed or notched (harpada) 
than that of the " Aje," but of nearly the same fashion ; 
and the two plants are much alike, but the " Batatas " are 
sweeter and more delicate, etc. : some of the "Ajes " weigh 
four pounds each, or more. In some parts of Castilla del Oro 
(in Darien) there are "Ajes" that are small and yellow, etc. 
(p. 273). His description of the two plants permits no reasonable 
doubt that his " Ajes " were of the genus Dioscorea. 
Moreover, they were not identical with — though they resemble 
— the imported " name "or "yam": for Oviedo states 
(Historia, lib. vii. c. 19, p. 286), "that 'name' (called 
' names ') is a foreign fruit, not natural to these Indies, which 
has been brought to Hispaniola and other places, and is suited 
to this evil race of negroes, and a profitable and good subsistence 
for them. . . . These ' names ' seem to be ' ajes,' 
but are not the same, and generally are larger than ' ajes.' " 
They had already multiplied greatly in the islands and on the 
mainland. 
The distinction between "Ajes" and "Batatas," though 
clearly apprehended, was sometimes lost sight of. Peter 
Martyr (dec. iii. lib. 9, p. 302) says that "the species of 
'Ages' are innumerable — the varieties being distinguished 
by their leaves and flowers ; " and he gives the American 
names of nine of the varieties ; but five of these nine are 
named by Oviedo (p. 274) as varieties of "Batatas." [See 
Batatas, ante.] 
The " Gentleman of Elvas," who wrote the narrative of 
DeSoto's expedition, mentions a fruit, at Santiago, Cuba, 
called " batata," the subsistence of a multitude of people, principally 
slaves, and which now (1538) grows in the island 
of Terceira, belonging to Bortugal. ..." It looks like the 
' ynhame,' with nearly the taste of chestnuts " (Eelacam Verdadeira, 
ch. 5). 1 
Jean de Lery, who was in Brazil in 1557, though he gives 
a good description of the " Batata," does not mention the 
Yam ; but it is figured and described by Piso (Hist. Nat. 
Brazil., 1648, p. 93), as "Inhame" of St. Thomas, called 
" Cara " by the natives of Brazil, and " Quiquoaquecongo " 
by the Congo negroes. Buiz de Montoya has the name 
" Cara " in his Tupi dictionary, 1639, and mentions five varieties. 
As the Tupi name for the Virginia Potato {Solanum 
tuberosum), " Carati " (i. e., white Yam), is formed from that 
of the " Inhame," it would seem that the latter was of earlier 
introduction. So, in the Mpongwe — a language of the Congo 
group — the Potato is called " mongotanga," "white-man's 
yam." 
Portulaca oleracea, Purslain. — Botanists have taken it 
for granted that this weed of gardens and other cultivated 
grounds was transported to America from the Old World. 
But Nuttall found it apparently indigenous on the upper Missouri 
forty years ago, and Dr. James in Long's Expedition, 
along the eastern base of the Eocky Mountains in what is now 
the State of Colorado. From thence to Texas it grows wild 
1 In one Indian language of the south, the Choctaw, the Sweet Potato 
is now called " ahe " ; while the Virginia Potato {S. tuberosum) takes the 
adopted prefix of " Irish," " Ilish ahe," or is sometimes called " ahe lumbo,' 
" round ahe." 
along with two other nearly related species. Moreover, the 
following evidence tends to show that its introduction, if introduced 
by human agency, took place before the landing of 
Columbus. 
On their first sight of the New World, the Spaniards were 
much impressed by the strangeness of all forms of animal and 
vegetable life : " all the trees are as unlike ours, as day is to 
night" — wrote Columbus, Oct. 17th, 1492, six days after 
landing at San Salvador : " and so are the fruits, and so the 
plants, and the stones, and all things" (Navarrete, i. 183). 
On the 28th, on the north shore of Cuba, he saw — apparently 
for the first time — a familiar plant ; " hallo verdolagas 
muchas y bledos," —he found much "purslane" and "bletum 
" (id., 192). It seems hardly possible that the Admiral 
and his companions could mistake a strange plant for a salad 
herb so well known as " verdolagas " to Spanish eyes and 
palates. Again, Oviedo, writing about 1526, in a list of 
" plants in the island of Hispaniola which are like those of 
Spain, and which were before the Christians came to these 
parts, and are natives of this land, and were not brought from 
Spain," mentions " verdolagas or pertulaca," and " bledos or 
bletum" (Blitum). 
In his description of " perebenecuc," written in 1525, he 
says that plant grew in great abundance in Saint Domingo 
and in many places on the continent, in the woods and fields ; 
even " purslane (' verdolagas ') is not more abundant here " 
(id., lib. xi. c. 5, p. 378). 
Jean de Lery, in Brazil in 1557, was as much impressed 
by the novelty of the flora as Columbus had been in the 
West Indies. "I declare," he wrote (Hist. Navig. Brazil., 
168), " as far as it was permitted mo to discover in wanderings 
through the woods and fields, that there are no trees or 
plants, or any fruits, that are not unlike ours, these three 
excepted, portulaca, ocymum, and filex " (in the original 
French edition, 1578, p. 217, "pourpier, basilic, et fougiere"). 
Capt. John Smith, in Virginia in 1606, found " many herbes 
m the spring, commonly dispersed throughout the woods, good 
for broths and sallets, as Violets, Purslain, Sorrell, etc. ; be- 
sides many we used whose names we know not " (Smith's 
Gen. History, 1632, p. 26; and repeated by Strachey, 
Travaile into Virginia, p. 120). Smith's purslain was 
probably Sedum ternatum. 
Sagard-Theodat, in the relation of his " Grand Voyage du 
Pays des Hurons," in 1624 (p. 331), says that the Huron s 
make little use of herbs, " although the pourpier or pourcelaine 
is very common there, and grows spontaneously in their 
fields of corn and pumpkins." 
W. Wood, who was in New England from 1629 to 1633, 
names " Purselane " among plants growing "in the woods, 
without either the art or the help of man " (N. E. Prospect, 
pt. 1, c. 5). We doubt its growing literally in the woods, as 
unlike its natural habit, and place more confidence in the 
statement of Champlain, who, in his earlier voyages, 1604-11, 
found plenty of excellent " pourpier," for his salads, on the 
coast of New England, growing among the Indian Corn ; " the 
savages making no more account of it than if it were a noxious 
weed" (Voyages, ed. 1632, p. 80). 
Humulus Bupulus, Hops. — Although the matter has nothing 
to do with the introduction of Hops into cultivation, it is 
noticeable that De Candolle assigns the home of the plant 
only to Europe and western Asia. It is undoubtedly indigenous 
to North America also, and is mentioned as such in the 
American works. In Gray's " Manual," besides the printing 
of the name in the type appropriate to indigenous species, the 
plant is expressly stated to be " clearly indigenous." But, 
through some oversight, in the " Brodromus" (xvi. 29), it is 
stated, in connection with this very reference, that the plant 
was introduced. 
Oca. — Considering that "Mate" and "Coca" find place 
in this volume, although perhaps rather employed than cultivated 
(at least the former), the absence of Oca ( Oxalis tuberosa 
and O. crenata) is noticeable. This esculent root deserves 
mention, if only for the antiquity of its culture in Peru. The 
name, which is Quichuan, appears to have belonged, specially, 
to Oxalis tuberosa. Another root " like the oca in shape, but 
not in taste," called in Quichua " anus," was less esteemed. 
Both were cultivated in Peru in the time of the Incas, and in 
the districts where no Maize grew, the crop of these tubers 
was of much importance (Garcillaso, Comment., b. v. c. 1 ; 
b. viii. c. 10). J. de Acosta, 1588-90, says "there are an 
infinite number" of roots used for food in the Indies, "but 
the Papas (Potatoes) and Ocas be the chief for nourishment 
and substance " (Nat. and Moral Hist, of the Indies, lib. 
iv. c. 18). 
Our notes upon plants cultivated for their herbage, tubers, 
roots, etc., have run to such a length that the remainder, concerning 
some plants cultivated for their fruits and seeds, must 
be left for another article. 
PART 11. 
The fourth chapter relates to plants cultivated for their 
fruits; the fifth, to those cultivated for their seeds. Our 
present annotations concern a few species or forms of Cucurbitacem,, 
the history of which has been involved in some obscurity 
and confusion. 
A word, in passing, upon the Peach, upon the history of 
which this volume throws some new light. De Candolle had 
formerly suggested China as its home, and he has brought 
together additional evidence in favor of that view. He 
shows how this conclusion goes against an old idea that the 
Peach is a derivative of the Almond, which is indigenous to 
western Asia, and was unknown to the Chinese anterior to the 
Christian era, while they had peaches of various sorts longbefore. 
Upon Pyrus there is a note relating to botanical 
orthography, p. 183, which we append, as it has an application 
to a few other words. 1 
1 " L'Orthographe Pyrus, adopte par Linnd, se trouve dans Pliue, 
'Historia,' ed. 1631, p. 301. Quelques botanistes ont voulu raffiner en 
e"crivant Pirus, et il en result, pour une recherche dans un livre moderne, 
il faut consulter l'index dans deux endroits, ou risquer de croire que les 
Poiriers ne sont pas dans l'ouvrage. En tous cas le nom des anciens est 
un nom vulgaire, mais le nom vraiment botanique est celui de Linne - , 
fondateur de la nomenclature adoptCe, et Linne' a ecrit Pyrus." 
Pears and apples were prehistoric in Europe, both wild and cultivated. 
Tagenaria vulgaris. Bottle Gourd. — Although doubtless 
an Old-World plant (De Candolle attributes it to India, Molucca, 
Abyssinia), yet it is not quite certain that it had not 
reached the New World before Columbus. At least the 
following notes may be put upon record. 
M. De Candolle mentions the case of the name gourd for 
pumpkin (" potiron ") by English writers, as " an example 
of the confusion of popular names and the greater precision 
of scientific names." Such confusion becomes more perplexing 
when we have to deal with popular names of the 15th and 
16th centuries. Parkinson — a good observer and a respectable 
botanist — complained, in 1640, of " our modern writers 
who confound Pepo, Melopepo, and Cucurbita so promiscuously 
that it is not possible to find out the distinct certainty 
of them all ; for some make that Pepo that others call Melopepo, 
and others, Cucurbita." (Theater of Plants, p. 770.) 
Scientific names of the 16th century are as obsolete as popular 
names of the same period. They do not help us to distinguish 
Lagenaria from Cucurbita, or Pepo from Melopepo ; 
or Citrouille from Citrullus. Early voyagers to America 
wrote cucurbita, calabaca, courge, or zucca, as a name for 
any gourd or pumpkin, and occasionally for a calabash which 
was not even a cucurbit. The relation of the first voyage 
of Columbus repeatedly mentions the "calabazas" used by 
the natives of St. Domingo and other islands for carryinowater 
(Navarrete, Collec, i. 180, 188, and Dec. 3, 1492). 
Columbus saw, near the east end of Cuba, fields planted with 
" calabazas " and other productions of the country (id., p. 225). 
Yet we know from Peter Martyr that some of the gourds 
(" cucurbita; ") used in the islands grew on " cucurbiteas 
arbores" as tall as elms (Dec. i. lib. 3, and iii. lib. 4; pp. 
38, 246). This tree, Crescentia Cujete, is described by 
Oviedo (Historia, lib. viii. c. 4) under its Haytian name, 
" Higucro " ; in Nicaragua it was called " Guacal " ; and in 
Brazil, " Cuiete " 1 (Marcgrav, Hist. Nat. Brasil., 123). J. de 
1 Not "Cujete " — unless j has the German sound. The Tupi name is 
formed from cut (cou-in, Lery) " the shell " or hard rind of a nut or fruit 
(and the bowl or calabash made from it) and etc' " good, precious." 
Lery (Hist. Navig. in Brasil., 154) describes the tree under 
the Brazilian name of " Choyne " ; but elsewhere (p. 246) 
he says "the natives have Cucurbitm (courges) and other 
kinds of fruits," from which "they make their bowls, called 
'coui,' and other vessels." 
It is certain that " calabacas," which were not arboreal 
but genuine cucurbits, were abundant — and were believed to 
grow spontaneously — in the islands and on the main land 
before 1526. Oviedo (Historia, lib. vii. c. 8) observes that 
" calabacas, in the Indias, were as common as in Spain, and 
of the same kinds (delas mismas), long and round, or banded 
(cenidas), and of all the shapes they usually have [in Spain]." 
They were much used "in all parts of these Indias, both the 
Islands and the Main," and " are one of the common things 
that the Indians cultivate in their gardens." They w-ere not 
cultivated for food — " for they do not eat them " — but for 
carrying water ; " and they have other calabacas that are 
in all respects like the aforesaid, except that they are bitter 
to the taste ; and there are many of these that grow of themselves 
without cultivation." 1 The same author (lib. xi., e. 1), 
in a list of plants introduced from Spain, names Melons and 
Cucumbers (pepinos), but not Gourds. 
The relation of the voyage of Amerigo Vespucci, 1489, in 
a description of the Indians of Trinidad and the coast of 
Paria, says that "each carried, hanging at his neck, two 
small dried gourds {cucurbitas) , one containing the plant 
that they were accustomed to chew, the other, a certain 
whitish flour," etc., and that each woman carried a " cucurbita" 
of water (Navarrete, iii. 252, 254). 
The "Cucurbita lagense forma," which Marcgrav found 
in Brazil, 1637-8 (Hist. Nat. Brasilia, 44), though " very 
probably Bagenaria vulgaris," yet, as M. De Candolle observes, 
" does not prove that the species w r as in that country 
before the voyage of Amerigo Vespucci in 1504 ; " but we 
M. De Candolle, p. 198, citing this passage from Ramusio's Italian 
translation of Oviedo's " Historia," has " zucche " for " calabacas " of the 
Spanish original, and takes no notice of what is said of their spontaneous 
growth. 
know from Lery, above cited, that the natives of Brazil used 
Cucurbitce, for bowls and drinking-vessels, at least as early 
as 1557. Moreover, the richness of the Tupi vocabulary in 
gourd-names suggests ■ — if it does not absolutely prove — that 
several varieties of Lagenaria were known to the Brazilians 
long before the visit of Biso and Marcgrav. The " Tesoro de 
la Lengua Guarani " (o Tupi) of Father Buiz de Montoya 
was first printed in 1639. It gives for gourd ("calabaco"), 
the Tupi general name, "la" [which is a compound of 
i " water," and yd or a "fruit "], and for the varieties ■ — among 
others —it names iaci "round gourd"; ittyurumi "narrowmouthed 
gourd " ; iati " long-necked gourd " ; idobd " widemouthed 
gourd " ; Mquatici " painted gourd " ; mcuipe " spoon 
gourd " (used for making spoons) ; idape " small gourd, used 
for drinking " ; idqua " great gourd " ; idem " gourd like a 
great dish "or bowl, etc. : not including the derivatives of cui, 
or the edible " calabacas " — to be mentioned hereafter. 
" Acosta, too," says M. De Candolle, " speaks of Calebasses 
which the Beruvians used for cups or vases, but the 
Spanish edition of his book is of 1591, more than a hundred 
years after the conquest." (?) Acosta says more than this. 
After mention of the " Calebasses or Indian Bompions . . . 
especially those which are proper to the country" [Peru], he 
adds : " There are a thousand kinds of Calebasses ; some are 
so deformed in their bigness that of the rind cut in the midst 
and cleansed, they make, as it were, baskets to put in all their 
meat for their dinner. Of the lesser, they make vessels to 
eat and drink in," etc. (Hist. nat. y moral de las Indias ; 
translation, revised by Markham, lib. iv., c. 19, p. 238.) 
Cucurbita maxima, C. Pepo, C. moscliata. Pumpkin, 
Squash, etc. —In the " Geographic Botanique " not one of 
the cultivated Cucurbitce is attributed to America, and a ref- 
erence to Nuttall's record that the warted squash was grown 
by the Indians on the upper Missouri is the only mention of 
any aboriginal cultivation of squashes in North America. In 
the present volume there is merely a reference, in this respect, 
to Dr. Harris's article in this Journal (xxiv., 1857), 
and to Mr. Trumbull's note in the " Bulletin of the Torrey 
Club " (1876), with the comment that : " Cela nous apprend 
seulement que les indigenes, un siecle apr£s la decouverte 
de la Virginie, 20 a 40 ans apr£s la colonisation par W. 
Baleigh, faisaient usage de certains fruit de Cucurbitacees." 
Nevertheless Cucurbita Pepo, upon botanical indications 
solely, is attributed to temperate North America in the general 
table, to a Mexican or Texan origin in the body of the 
work. This rests upon the collection by Lindheimer, in 
Texas, of a form of this species " apparently indigenous." 
That was between thirty and forty years ago ; no wild specimen 
has since been received from all that region (nor from 
any other) ; and it is wellnigh certain that the species was 
commonly cultivated in all that country by the aborigines. 
If ever found truly indigenous, it will probably be farther 
south than Texas. G. maxima is now set down as from 
Guinea, on the strength of a single finding of it " apparently 
indigenous "on the banks of the Niger. C. moscliata (to 
which Vilmorin refers the Canada Crook-neck Squash) is in 
the list of species of completely unknown or uncertain origin. 
In this state of the case, it is certainly worth while to present 
the evidence — gathered with much care and pains — 
which assures us that one or two, and perhaps all three, of 
these species, and many varieties, were largely cultivated 
throughout America, from the tropics to Canada, before the 
voyages of Columbus. 
Allusion has already been made (under Lagenaria) to the 
difficulty of distinguishing the genera of Cucurbitacem under 
the names by which they are mentioned by voyagers and 
explorers of the first century after the discovery of America ; 
and the question of species is particularly difficult. Yet we 
find abundant evidence — especially as respects North America 
— (1) that, in various parts of the country remote from each 
other, the cultivation of one or more species of Cucurbits by 
the Indians was established before those places are known to 
have been visited by Europeans ; (2) that these species or 
varieties were novel to Europeans, and were regarded by botanists 
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as well as by 
the voyagers and first colonists, as natives or denizens of the 
region in which they were found ; and (3) that they became 
known only under American names ; one of these names 
(Squash) becoming, in popular use, generic, and two others 
(Macock and Cushaw) surviving, as names of varieties, into 
the present century. 
To present this evidence as nearly as possible in the order 
of time, we refer, first, to the relation of the first voyage of 
Columbus. December 3, 1492, entering a small river [the 
Eio Boma], near the eastern end of the island of Cuba, he 
found near it a populous Indian village, and saw large cultivated 
fields " planted with many things of the country, and 
calabazas, a glorious sight (que era gloria vella) ! " See 
Navarrete, Colec, i. 225. It is not certain that these " calabazas" 
were not bottle-gourds (Lagenaria), but it is, to say 
the least, highly improbable that the enthusiasm of Columbus 
would have been so kindled by the promise of a harvest of 
little value to Europeans. 
Oviedo (Historia, 1. xi. c. 1) names among plants and seeds 
brought from Spain to Hispaniola " melones " and " pepinos " 
—of which imported varieties were already abundant in the 
island before 1535 ; the seed of " cogombros " brought from 
Castile had not succeeded so well. 
In July, 1528, Cabeca de Vaca found near Tampa Bay, in 
Florida, "maize, beans, and pumpkins in great plenty, and 
beginning to be fit for gathering." In 1535-6, when passing 
through Texas, the Indians supplied him with prickly pears 
and, occasionally, maize ; but after crossing " a great river 
coming from the north" — probably the Eio Grande —he 
and his companions came to a region having " fine dwellings 
of civilization, whose inhabitants lived on beans and pumpkins 
" — and, when the season was not too dry for raising it, 
maize (Eelacion, 1542 ; translated by B. Smith, 1871). 
In the summer and autumn of 1539, De Soto found the 
Appalachian country, in western Florida, well supplied with 
" maize, beans (fesoles) and pumpkins (calabacas) ; " the 
pumpkins of Uzachil were " better and more savory than 
those of Spain ; " there were " fields of maize, beans, and 
pumpkins," not far from Tampa Bay, where he first landed 
from Cuba ; at Pacaha, on the Mississippi, the northernmost 
point he reached (1541), he found again " many pumpkins 
and much maize and beans " ; and, still westward, at Coligoa, 
" beans and pumpkins were in great plenty ; both were larger 
and better than those of Spain ; the pumpkins when roasted 
had nearly the taste of chestnuts " (Oviedo, lib. xvii. cc. 24 
28; True Relation, etc., by a Fidalgo of Elvas; translated 
by Buckingham Smith, pp. 45, 47, 122, 285). Oviedo writes 
" calabacas," but the author of the Portuguese " Belacam 
Verdadeira " (1557) has, in one or more of the places cited, 
" aboboras." 
In 1535, Jacques Cartier, the first explorer of the St. Lawrence, 
found among the Indians of Canada " grand quantite' 
de gros melons, concombres and courges " (Bref Eecit de la 
Navigation, etc., 1545 ; reimpr. Tross, 1863, ff. 24, 31). 
Sagard, whose " Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons " was 
made in 1642, makes repeated mention of the native squashes 
(" citrouilles du pays") which the Hurons raised in abundance, 
and which he found very good, boiled or baked (pp. 85, 
105, 140, 331). In his "Histoire du Canada" (283) he 
describes the method by which the Indians hastened the germination 
of the seeds of these " citrouilles du pays," and 
"raise them with great ease." 
Lahontan (Nouv. Voyages, 1703, ii. 61) describes the 
" Citrouilles " of (southern) Canada — " sweet, and of a different 
kind from those of Europe, where," as several persons 
assured him, these would not grow. " They are of the size 
of our melons; the flesh yellow as saffron. They usually 
bake them in the oven, but they are better roasted under the 
embers, Indian fashion," etc. Lahontan had as little doubt as 
Sagard had, that these " citrouilles " (cultivated by the Indians 
of Canada from the time of Cartier, at least) were genuinely 
" du pays." 
As to the Cucurbitacem of Virginia, M. De Candolle admits, 
" only, that the natives, a century after the discovery of Virginia, 
twenty to forty years after the colonization by W. 
Ealeigh, made use of certain fruits of Cucurbitacem " 
(p. 201). Let us reexamine the evidence. Captains Amidas 
and Barlow, in the first vessels sent by Sir Walter Raleigh to 
the New World, landed on an island in Ocracoke Inlet (now 
within North Carolina) in 1584. While the vessels remained 
there, and while they were at Roanoke Island near by, the 
Indians entertained them kindly, and " sent them, commonly 
every day, a brace of bucks, conies, etc., sometimes melons, 
walnuts, cucumbers, pease, and divers roots " (J. Smith's 
Gen. Hist. p. 3). 
What these "melons," or some of them, were, we learn 
from later explorers and the first colonists of Virginia 
(proper) . 
Captain John Smith says that the Indians of Virginia 
(1606-8) " plant amongst their corn Pumpions, and a fruit 
like unto a musk-melon, but less and worse, which they call 
Macocks," etc. (Gen. Hist. p. 29). Strachey, who was in 
Virginia in 1610, describes these " macock gourds " in nearly 
the same words (Trav. into Virginia, p. 72) ; elsewhere, he 
says the " macokos is of the form of our pumpions — I must 
confess, nothing so good, — 't is of a more waterish taste," and 
he mentions also the "pumpions" planted by the Indians, 
and " a kind of million " which they " seeth and put into 
their walnut-milk, and so make a kind of toothsome meat " 
(p. 119). " The Indian Pumpion, the Water-melon, Muskmelon," 
etc., are named among fruits introduced into Bermuda, 
by the English, before 1623 (Smith's Gen. Hist, 
p. 171)7 
1 L'Ecluso (Clusius) heard of these Macocks in 1591 or earlier. In 
his "Exotica" (1605 ; lib. iii. c. 2) he describes a fruit — " Macocqwer 
Virginiansium, forte " — which had been sent him from London by James 
Garet, brought from " the province of Wingandecaow, which the English 
call Virginia." He conjectured that this might be " the fruit which the 
natives of that region call Macocqwer" — but his figure and description 
do not favor this identification. The fruit, he says, is nearly orbicular ; 
four inches in diameter ; with a hard rind, yellowish on the outside ; many 
seeds, flat and heart-shaped (" cordis, ut vulgo pingitur, formam referenda"). 
L'Ecluse thought it might be one of the gourds which the natives 
used for rattles, as the Brazilians used their Tamaraca, etc. His specimen 
was old and dried, the pulp blackened, the rind covered with a dark 
membrane, "perquam sparsfe qusedam fibrai a pediculo ad summum." 
this must have been a fruit of Crescentia cucurbitina, a calabash, which is 
a native not only of the West Indies, but also of southern Florida. 
Among Johnson's additions to Gerarde's " Herball," 1636, 
there is a description of " Macock Virginian!, sive Pepo Virginianus; 
the Virginian Macock or Pompion " (pp. 919, 
921). The description is dated 1621, and signed by John 
Goodyer. The plant has "great broad shrivelled yellow 
flowers, like those of the common Pompion." The fruit, " somewhat 
round, not extending in length, but flat like a bowl, but 
not so big as an ordinary bowl, being seldom four inches broad 
and three inches long ; of a blackish green color when it is 
ripe. The substance or eatable part, of a yellowish white 
color. . . . Seeds like the common Pompion, but smaller." 
The " small round Indian Pompion," and " the cornered Indian 
Pompion " — the latter resembling our common " scolloped 
Squash " (" Pepones lati, Broad Melons or Pep ons " of 
Lyte's Dodoens, p. 588) — are described and figured in " Johnson's 
Gerarde," p. 920. 
Beverley's "History of Virginia," 1705, p. 124, mentions 
the Macocks, " a sort of Melopepones, or lesser sort of Pompion 
or Cashaw," which he identifies with the " Squash or 
Squonter Squash "of New England. " The Indian name," he 
says, "is still retained by them." Professor Scheie de Vere 
(of Virginia) states that it still " survives in its anglicized 
form of Mayeock" (Americanisms, 1871, p. 60). 
The "Cushaw" ("Ecushaw," Hariot) is described by Beverley 
(Hist, of Virg., p. 124) as " a kind of Pumpion, of a bluish 
green color, streaked with white when they are fit for use. 
They are larger than the Pompions, and have a long narrow 
neck. . . . The Cushaws and Pompions they lay by, which 
will keep several months good, after they are gathered " 
(p. 152). Bartlett, " Diet, of Americanisms," notes the name 
Cushaw, " sometimes spelled Kershaw," as " Western " for a 
pumpkin. Beverley's description makes it nearly certain that 
the variety so named was the (New England) winter " crookneck" 
squash — which, five and twenty years ago, might have 
been seen hanging, by its necklace of flannel " list," in every 
New England farmer's kitchen, from early harvest time till 
wanted for Thanksgiving or Christmas pumpkin-pies. 
The Bev. Francis Higginson, who came to New England in 
1629, wrote from Salem, a few weeks after his arrival : " Here 
are stores of pompions, cowcumbers, and other things of that 
nature which I know not " (N. E. Plantation, 1630) ; and, 
again: "We abound with . . . sundry sorts of fruits, as 
musk-melons, water-melons, Indian pompions, Indian pease, 
beans, and many other odd fruits that I cannot name " 
(Young's Chron. of Mass., 265). William Wood, who was 
in New England from 1629 to 1633, says of the Indians of 
Massachusetts : "In summer, when their corne is spent, 
' Isquoutersquashes ' is their best bread, a fruit like a young 
Pumpion" (N. E. Prospect, p. 76). Roger Williams, 1643° 
names these " AsMtasquash, their vine-apples, which the 
English from them call squashes, about the bignesse of apples, 
of several colors, a sweet, light, wholesome refreshing" 
(Key to the Language of America, 103). Again, Josselyn 
(1638-71, N. E. Earities, 57) mentions these " squashes . . . 
more truly Squontersquashes, a kind of melon or rather gourd, 
for they oftentimes degenerate into gourds ; some of these 
are green, some yellow, some longishlike a gourd, others round 
like an apple, all of them pleasant food boiled and buttered, 
etc. But the best yellow squash, called an Apple squash, 
because like an apple, and about the bigness of a Pome-water 
is the best kind : they arc much eaten by the Indians and the 
English." But he distinguishes these from the " Pompions 
[of which] there be several kinds, some proper to the country 
; they are dryer than our English Pompions, and better 
tasted ; you may eat them green " (p. 91). The last words 
(here italicized) give a nearly literal translation of the 
Algonkin-Indian name of Cucurbits, — in the dialect of New 
England, "asq," plural " asquash," "green things," or (to be 
eaten) " immature." Eliot, in his version of the Bible (1663) 
names three kinds of asquash : askoot-asquash [ = Askutasquash, 
R. Williams, Isquoutersquash-es of Wood, Squontersquash-es 
of Josselyn, ut supra], for "cucumbers"; quonooasquash 
"gourds" [literally, " long asquash"] ; and monaskoot-asquash 
" melons." 
Squashes were first known to the Dutch by their Algonkin 
name. Van der Donck, after speaking of the pump- 
kins of New Netherland (1642-53), adds : " The natives have 
another species of this vegetable peculiar to themselves, called 
by our people ' quaasiens,' a name derived from the aborigines, 
as the plant was not known to us before our intercourse with 
them. It is a delightful fruit, as well to the eye on account 
of its fine variety of colors, as to the mouth for its agreeable 
taste. ... It is gathered early in summer, and when it is 
planted in the middle of April, the fruit is fit for eating by 
the first of June. They do not wait for it to ripen before 
making use of the fruit, but only until it has attained a certain 
size. They gather the squashes and immediately place them 
on the fire without any further trouble. . . . The natives 
make great account of this vegetable." (Descript. of N. Netherlands, 
1656 ; transl. in N. Y. Hist. Soc. Coll., 2 ser., i. 186.) 
Thus far we have cited, with one or two exceptions, American 
authorities. M. De Candolle, after mentioning "the 
three forms of Pepones figured by Dodoens, edition of 1557, 
to which a fourth, P. rotundus major, was added in the edition 
of 1616," and a figure of P. oblongus, in Lobel. " Icones," 
641, observes, that " the names given to these plants indicate 
a foreign origin ; but the authors can affirm nothing in this 
regard ; the less so, because the name Indian signifies, either, 
of southern Asia or of America" (p. 204). A collation of 
the descriptions of Pepones or Cucurbitas, given by European 
botanists of the sixteenth century, does away with this ambiguity. 

Tragus (Hieron. Bock), "De Stirpium Nomenclaturis," 
etc., 1552, p. 830, described and figured Melo, Pepo, Cucumis, 
and Citreolus; and (p. 832) named, also, Cucumis sylvestris. 
In the next chapter (p. 834) he wrote "De Cucumere 
seu, ut vulgo loquuntur, Zucco marino " — with a figure. 
" Many kinds of strange plants," he says, " have been brought 
from remote parts into Germany, in the last few years." 
Among others, these " poma aestiva," of which some are large, 
some small, some round, some oblong, some sweet, others 
bitter, of various colors. " Some call these ' Cucumeri,' and 
assert that they are ' Turkish Cucumeres,' with which opinion 
I cannot agree. ... I call them Mala mstiva & Indica," of 
which he distinguishes four kinds, if Indica crocea, lutea, 
citrina, and nigra. " Commonly," he says, " they are called 
Zucco marina, because they first came to us from parts 
beyond the sea, some from Syria, some from India, which the 
names given them attest ; for they are commonly called Zucco 
de Syria and Zucco de Peru." 
The figure of Cucumer marinus, Ital. Cocomere marino, 
etc., in the " Effigies Plantarum " of Fuchs, 1549, is a reduced 
copy of Bock's, and substantially agrees with that of Pepo 
rotundus in Lyte's "Dodoens," p. 587, which was "called 
also Cucumis marinus ; of some, Zucco marino ; in French, 
Concombre marin, Pompons Turquins," etc. 
Matthioli of Padua (Conim. in Dioscor., ed. 1559, p. 292) 
is more explicit. " There are," he says, " various kinds of 
cucurbits foreign to Italy, which can be kept fresh far into 
the winter. They say that these came into Italy from the 
West Indies, whence they are called by many Indian. Their 
taste is sweetish, not so insipid as ours," etc. ; and his figure 
of Cucurbita Indica agrees with that of Bock's Zucco marinus 
(or " Zucco de Peru ") and with Lyte's Pepo rotundus. 
It is certain, then, that the botanists of the 16th century to 
whom M. De Candolle refers, used Indian — when applied to 
varieties of Cucurbita —in the sense of American. In the 
17th century, the evidence is not less direct. Parkinson 
(Theatrum Botanicum, 1640, pp. 769, 770) figures and describes 
(1) Cucurbita lagenaria major, the greater Bottle 
Gourd ; (2) C. longa, the long Gourd ; (3, 4) C. clypeiformis 
& verrucosa, and Anguria JEgyptiaca, the Simmel 
[Scallop Squash], and the rugged Gourd [warted Squash, 
orbiculate depressed], and the Egyptian Citruell or Watery 
Million ; (5) Cucurbita Indica, ovalis, pyriformis, & fere 
rotundus, Indian Gourds, oval, pear-fashioned, and almost 
round. Of these Indian Gourds he says : " There is very 
great variety of these Gourds (or Millions, as some call them, 
or Pompions, as I may call them) that came out of America 
or the West Indies, from sundry places, both farther south 
among the Spanish colonies, and nearer hand, in our own of 
Virginia, New England, etc." He notes the great variety 
of size, shape, and color, " some as great as our pompions, 
some as small as an apple, some discolored on the outside, 
green with whitish or yellowish stripes, . . . some also reddish, 
spotted, or .striped, and some of a deep yellow." 
Piso and Marcgrav (Hist. Nat. Brasil., 1648, p. 44) describe 
and figure a plant called " lurumu " [ = Yurumu] by 
the Brazilians, and by the Portuguese, "Bobora." M. De 
Candolle, p. 201, is inclined to agree with modern botanists in 
referring this to C. maxima; but, as he remarks, it appears 
to have been a cultivated plant. If introduced from abroad, 
the name given it by the Tupis was probably formed, by prefix 
or affix, from that of some native (or naturalized) species 
to which it had some resemblance. In Montoya's " Tesoro," 
1639, we find"Yurua" " calabacillos silvestres," small wild 
calabazas; but the name "Yurumu" did not yet appear. 
Almost a century before the visit of Biso and Marcgrav, Jean 
de Lery saw in Brazil (1557) "certains citrouilles rondes, 
fort douce a manger," called by the natives " Maurongaus " 
(Voyage, ed. 1578, p. 217). The Tupi name "moranga" 
(the first two vowels nasal) denotes a " handsome fruit." 
Bycopersicum esculentum, Tomato. — We have only to note 
an oversight in respect to the Mexican cultivation of the Mala 
Peruviana, as it was named by some botanists of the 16th 
century. De Candolle refers to Humboldt's statement that 
the cultivation of this esculent was ancient in Mexico, but 
adds that there is no mention of it in the earliest work on the 
plants of that country, namely: Hernandez, "Historia." But 
Hernandez (ed. 1651, p. 295 ff.) actually has a chapter " De 
Tomatl, seu planta acinosa vel Solano," and describes several 
sorts under their Mexican names. 1 
1 I find only one writer in the 16th century who gave the Tomato a 
name indicating a Peruvian origin — namely, Anguillara, whose treatise 
"De Simplicibus" was first printed in Italian, at Venice, 1561. On his 
authority the name Poma Peruviana is introduced in the synonymy by C. 
Bauhin, in his annotations on Matthioli, 1598 (p. 761), and the " Hortus 
Eystettensis " (attributed to Besler), published in 1613, is referred to by 
the same writer (Pinax, 1771, p. IG7) an authority for the names, inter alia, 
" Poma amoris fructu rubro & Mala Peruviana." The "Hortus Eystettensis 
" is the only authority cited for Mala Peruviana in the work to 
Persea gratissima, Alligator Pear of the English, 1' Avocat 
of the French ; a singular corruption of a native name, as De 
Candolle remarks, which had no more to do with an alligator 
than with a lawyer. Our author does not carry back the 
native Mexican name quite to its original, which was " Ahuacahuitl" 
corrupted by the Spaniards into " Aquacate," 
" Avogade," etc. Champlain, who saw it in Mexico in 1599 
or 1600, calls the fruit " Accoiates " and " Acoyates " ; " Voy. 
to the W. Indies " [Hakluyt Soc, 1859], p. 28. 
Oviedo described " the wild pear-tree of the main land," in 
1526. It grew "in the province of Castilo del Ora (Panama), 
in the sierras of Capira and the country of the cacique of 
Juanaga," etc. In the revision of his first work, in 1535, he 
adds, that he had, some years before, seen these trees cultivated 
by the Indians in Nicaragua (Historia, lib. ix. c. 22). 
It was still a tree of "Terra firma" — not yet introduced 
into the Islands. Clusius saw it in a garden in Valencia — 
" said to be brought from America " — thirty-five years earlier 
than the date (1601) mentioned by De Candolle. He 
described the Persea in the first edition of his " Historia 
rariorum Stirpium," 1576 (lib. i. c. 2), published five years 
after his journey in Spain. 
Passiflora. — This genus is wholly omitted by De Candolle ; 
unaccountably so, considering how much Granadillas have 
been cultivated and prized in tropical countries. A note on 
the subject may not be out of place, as a species was cultivated 
by our own Indians. 
which M. De Candolle refers — the " Historia Stirpium," attributed to 
J. Bauhin, but published long after his death (in 1551), with large additions 
by his son-in-law Cherler, and by ChabrEeus and Graffenreid. Guillandinus, 
of Padua, in a treatise " De Papyro," 1572, named the " Tumatle 
Americanorum " as a species of " Pomum Amoris or Solarium pomiferum " ; 
and earlier, Matthioli had described it (Comment, in Dioscor., ed. 1559, 
p. 537J as a " kind of Mala insana " [Solarium Melongena"], which was 
" beginning to be imported " into Italy, and which was " popularly called 
Pomi d'oro, that is, Mala aurea." 
Anguillara may have confounded the Tomato with another of the 
American Solanacem, introduced at about the same period — the Thorn 
Apple {Datura Stramonium) which Guillandinus (1572) named Mala 
Peruviana, and the French called "Pomme de Perou."-— J. H. T. 
As to early history and aboriginal nomenclature, Monardes 
(De Simplicibus Medic, c. 66) says that the Granadilla was 
spontaneous in Peru, and that the fruit was highly esteemed 
by the Indians and by the Spaniards. Cieca de Leon (Chron. 
del Peru, c. 28), about 1550, saw it growing in the valley of 
the Eio Lile, near Cali (now in Colombia), and in the country 
about Pasto. The flower and fruit are mentioned by J. 
de Acosta (Nat. and Moral Hist, of the Indies, b. ii. c. 38) 
— " the fruit sweet, and too sweet, in the opinion of some." 
Lery (1557-8) does not appear to have found it in Brazil, 
but it was common there before the middle of the 17th century. 
Piso and Marcgrav (Hist. Nat. Brasil., 1648, pp. 70, 
106) reckon nine species or more, of which four were cultivated 
— two especially for their fruits. The Tupi (Brazilian) 
name was " Mburucuia " (" Montoya," 1639), which Piso and 
Marcgrav, I. c, wrote " Murbcuia " ; the species which was 
generally cultivated for its fruit was " Mburucuia-guacu " 
(7 e., great " Murucuya "). Father R. Breton (Diet. Caraibe, 
1665) gives "Mereeoya" as the Carib name of the 
fruit ; but this seems to have been adopted from the Tupi — 
for in that language " Mburucuia " denotes the " fruit of a 
vine." 
55 
It is remarkable that the Tupi (and Carib) name went with 
the plant and its fruit to the country of the Algonkins before 
the coming of Europeans. One species {Passiflora incarnataP) 
was cultivated by the Indians of Virginia. "They 
plant also Maracocks, a wild fruit like a lemon, which also 
increase infinitely " (Capt. John Smith, Gen. Hist., p. 29) : 
and, again (p. 25), Smith mentions the " fruit which the inhabitants 
call ' Maracocks ' — pleasant, wholesome fruit" — 
among "things which arc naturally in Virginia." Strachey 
(Travaile into Virginia, 72, 119) describes the " fruit called 
by the natives a ' maracock,' which the Indians plant," etc. 
Although no longer planted, the fruit of the spontaneous 
plant is still eaten in the southern Atlantic States ; and its 
popular name, "May-pop," is probably the last stage of tho 
Tupi original. 
Now our Passiflora incarnata is so like P. edulis (well 
known in cultivation), the home of which is in Brazil, 1 that 
botanists have been unable clearly to distinguish the two, except 
by the fact that ours, dying down, to the ground at approach 
of winter, remains herbaceous. It occurs in a rather 
narrow geographical range ; and Dr. Masters, in his elaborate 
study of the order (Trans. Linn. Soc, xxvii. 641 ; see also 
Flora Brasiliensis), says that "being so far separate from 
the remainder of its allies of the same subgenus, [it] may be 
considered as an outlier." Altogether we may infer that the 
fruit and the name were originally derived from the same 
South American source. 
Musa, Banana. — The author concludes, as did Bobert 
Brown, that Banana and Plantain are varieties of one species ; 
also that this species is of the Old World ; that in all probability 
it was not known in the West Indies when discovered 
by Columbus ; but that in respect to the western side of South 
America there is some evidence which is not easily ruled out, 
especially the statement of Garcilasso that the Peruvians had 
the Banana before the conquest, and of Stevenson ( Trav. in 
S. Amer.), who is said to have seen in the ancient Peruvian 
tombs beds made of Banana leaves. This is discredited because 
the author found beans in the same tombs, " et que la feve est 
certainement de l'ancien monde." But if Stevenson wrote 
beans, without doubt he meant the seeds of Phaseolus, not of 
Faba. It would rather seem that the Banana, like the Sweet 
Potato and Cocoa-nut, had early been transported over the 
Pacific. 
Phaseolus vulgaris, Kidney Bean. — Three weeks after his 
first landing in the New World Columbus saw, near Nuevitas 
in Cuba, fields planted with " faxones and fabas very different 
from those of Spain," and two clays afterwards, following 
the north coast of Cuba, he again found " land well cultivated 
with these fexoes and habas much unlike ours." "Faxones" 
1 Not Mexico, although indeed said to have been brought from New 
Spain to the garden of the Farnese palace, in Rome, as early as 1619. 
It is described, under the name of " Maracot " — with excellent plates 
showing the plant, the flower, and the fruit —by Tobias Aldinus, in 
" Rarior. Plant. Horti Farnesiani " (Romte, 1625), pp. 49-59. 
or "fexoes" were —as Navarrete notes, " Colec." i. 200, 
203 — "the same as frejoles or judias," Spanish names for 
Kidney beans, which the Portuguese call "Feijaos." Oviedo 
(1525-35) speaks of the " fesoles, as the Spaniards call them, 
of which there are many kinds in the [West] Indias." These 
fesoles, he says (lib. vii. c. 18), " are called by Pliny ' fagivoles': 
in Aragon we call them ' judias,' and the seeds of 
those of Spain and of this country are properly the same." 
The natives of Hispaniola raise these fesoles, but they are 
much more abundant on the main land, especially in New 
Spain and Nicaragua. " I have, in the province of Nagrando 
in Nicaragua, seen them gather a hundred hanegas (bushels, 
nearly) of these fesoles : and they also, in that country and 
other parts of that coast, have many other kinds of fesoles, 
besides the common sort: some have yellow seeds, others 
spotted," etc. In another place (lib. xi. c. 1), Oviedo, mentioning 
plants that had been brought from Spain to Hispaniola 
and other parts of America, " in the beginning," names 
" Fesoles, called in Aragon ' Judias,' and in my country Castile] 
' Arvejas luengas ' : " but "of these, there is no need of 
bringing: more seed, for in this island and on the main many 
* "XT* 
bushels are harvested every year, and in the province of JN icaragua 
they are indigenous (naturales de la misma tierra), 
and a great number of bushels are produced yearly of these 
and of other fesoles of other sorts and different colors," etc. 
From this time (1535) onward, nearly every writer who 
mentioned plants cultivated by the Indians named, together 
or in close connection, maize, beans, and pumpkins. Eeference 
to several of these writers has been made in our notes on 
Cucurbitce. Cabeca de Vaca found beans cultivated by the 
Indians of Florida in 1528, and again near the western limit 
of his wanderings (in New Mexico or Sonora) in 1535. De 
Soto, at his landing in 1539, found " fields of maize, beans, 
and pumpkins," near Tampa Bay ; and at Coligoa (west of 
the Mississippi) " beans and pumpkins were in great plenty ; 
both were larger and better than those of Spain ; " and so, at 
other places, on his travels to the west and north. 
Jacques Cartier, the discoverer of the St. Lawrence, on his 
first voyage, 1534, found that the Indians near the mouth of 
that river on the Bay of Gaspe had abundance of maize, and 
had " beans (febues) which they name ' Sahu,' " or (as spelled 
in the vocabulary printed with his Discourse du Voyage) 
" Sahe." ! The " Bref Becit " of his second voyage, 1535-36, 
mentions the use of corn and beans by the Indians of the St. 
Lawrence ■ — " bled & febues & poix, desquels ilz out assez " 
(f. 24). 
Father Sagard in his " History of Canada " and in the account 
of his journey to the country of the Hurons, 1625, mentions 
the cultivation and use of " fezolles " by the Indians. 
The Hurons used in their succotash (" neintahouy ") " a third 
or a quarter part of their fezoles, called ogaressa " (Grand 
Voyage, 83, 138). 
Lescarbot, 1608, says that the Indians of Maine, like those 
of Virginia and Florida, plant their corn in hills, " and between 
the kernels of corn they plant beans marked (feves 
riolees) with various colors, which are very delicate ; these, 
because they are not so high as the corn, grow very well 
among it " (Hist. Nouv. France, ed. 1612, p. 835 ; see also 
p. 744). 
The relation of the voyage of Captains Amidas and Barlow 
to Virginia, 1584, mentions pease, melons, etc., at Eoanoke 
Island, but does not name beans ; but Harriot, who accompanied 
them on this voyage, includes both " Wickonzour, 
called by us pease," and " Okindjier, called by us beans," 
among the productions of that country. Capt. John Smith, 
who was in Virginia in 1607, and Strachey, who was there in 
1610, describe (in nearly the same words) the Indian manner 
of planting corn and beans : " they plant also pease they call 
assentamens, which are the same they call in Italy fagioli : 
their beans are the same the Turks call garvances, but these 
they much esteem for dainties " (Smith's Gen. Hist., 28 ; 
Strachey, Trav. in Virginia, 117). Evidently, these names 
1 The language spoken by these Indians was a dialect of the Huron- 
Iroquois group, and we trace the name sahe (as Cartier caught it) in the 
Mohawk osahe-ta, " fesoles " of Bruyas (17th century), and the Onondaga 
ousaheta and hosaheta, " poix, feve " (Shea's Onondaga Dictionary). 
are confounded. Garvance was the French name of the 
Chick Pea {Cicer arietinum), the Spanish garbanzo ; and 
it is not probable that the Turks gave this name to any kind 
of beans ; while fagiuoli was the Italian equivalent of Latin 
phaseoli. Strachey's Virginian vocabulary gives assentamens 
(and otassentamens) for "pease," and peccatoas, peketawes, 
for " beans." 
It must be remembered that at the beginning of the 17th 
century kidney beans —as well as vetchlings (Lathyrus) — 
were popularly regarded as a kind of pease, or "peason." 
Turner, in his " Names of Herbes," 1548, says that " Fhasiolus 
otherwyse called Dolichos, may be called in English ' long 
peasen or faselles ; ' . . .in French phaseoles : " and " Smilax 
hortensis, ... in French, as some wryte Phaseole . . . 
may be called in English Kydney beane," etc. (Eng. Dial. 
Soc, ed. 1881, pp. 62, 74). Lyte's " Dodoens," 1578, follows 
Turner for the English names of Phaseolus, " Kidney beane 
and Sperage ; of some they are called Faselles, or Long Peason," 
etc. (p. 474) : his " common Peason " and " middle 
Peason " are Ervilia {Ervum Ervilia L?) and Pisum arvense 
L. ; while P. sativum is distinguished as " Great Peason, 
Garden Peason, and Branche Peason, because, as I 
thinke, they must be holpen or stayed up with branches" 
(id. 476). 
So, on the continent, the Spanish names for fesoles was 
"arvejas luengas " (Oviedo), i. e., long vetches, and the garden 
pea {P. sativum) was "un corto genero de Arvejas " 
(Calepin's Diction., ed. 1616), a short kind of vetches. The 
confusion of names is frequent in writers of the 16th and first 
half of the 17th centuries, in French as well as English and 
Spanish. " Magno sane labore " —as Tragus found — 
"Phasioli, Orobi, et Pisa, nee non Cicer arietina, maxime 
agrestia, secernuntur," (Stirp. Hist., 1552, p. 613). 
Champlain uses " poix " and " feves," interchangeably, as 
names of the American Phaseoli. In Breton's " Diction. 
Fr.-Caraibe " (1666) the Carib name, " calaoiiana," stands for 
"poisde Bresil" and "febue de Bresil"; " pois rouges, dit 
Anglois, mibipi ; " and " Bois, manconti " — this being, probably, 
the (introduced) P. sativum. 
Sagard (1624-5) says that the Hurons called the coarser 
part of their pounded maize — after the meal had been sifted 
from it — " Acointa, c'est a dire Bois (car ils lui donnent le 
mesme nom qu'a nos pois) ; " and in his " Dictionnaire 
Huronne," he has " Pois, Acointa," " Fezolles, Ogaressa ; " 
whence we infer that French pease [P. sativum] were 
already cultivated by or known to the Hurons. The Abnakis 
of western Maine, in the 17th century, called pease, " awennootsi-minar," 
i. e. " French (or foreign) seeds." Tanner, 
1830, gives as the Chippeway name of the " Wild Pea-vine " 
[Phaseolus diversifolius f] " Anishemin," i. e. " Indian (or 
native) seeds." In nearly all North American languages, the 
names for kidney-beans (Phaseoli) are of earlier formation 
than those for garden pease. The latter are usually formed 
on the former : e. g. Chahta, tobi, " bean " ; tobi hullo, [wild] 
" pea" ; tobi hikint Ami, " garden pea " (Byington) ; Dakota, 
o n mnicha, " bean " ; o n mnicha hmiydFydF [i. e. " round bean "], 
" pea." 
Without multiplying citations — we may assume that the 
" pease " and " poix " which early voyagers found cultivated 
by the American Indian were species of Phaseolus — not 
Pisum. 
Five and twenty years before the settlement of Virginia, the 
Indians of Carolina and Florida had "fine citroiiilles and 
very good beans" (Lescarbot, Nouv. France, 778). Lawson, 
1700-1708, gives a more particular description of the southern 
beans cultivated by the Indians. " The Kidney-beans," he 
says, " were here before the English came, being very plentiful 
in Indian corn-fields." " The Bushel bean," a spontaneous 
growth, very flat, white and mottled with a purple figure, 
was trained on poles [P. multiflorus ?] : " Indian Rounceval, 
or Miraculous PAdse, so called from their long pods and great 
increase ; they are very good, and so are the ' Bonavies, Calavancies 
[= Garvances ?], Nanticokes,'. and abundance of 
other pulse, too tedious to mention, which we found the Indians 
possessed of when we settled in America " (Voyage to 
Carolina, pp. 76, 77). 
In the northern States, we find little difficulty in establishing 
the identity of Phaseolus vulgaris with the beans cultivated 
by the Indians at the first coming of Europeans. These 
were from the first distinguished as " Indian beans," from 
the Garden beans ( Vicia Faba) introduced by the English. 
In 1609, Hudson, exploring the river which bears his name, 
saw at an Indian village —in the vicinity of Schodac and 
Castleton, Eensselaer County, N. Y. —"a great quantity of 
maize or Indian corn, and beans of the last year's growth" 
(Hudson's Journal, in De Laet, 1625, b. iii. ch. 10, and 
Juet's, in Purchas : N. Y. Hist. Soc. Coll., 2 Ser., i. 300, 
325). 
1631-42. The Indians of New Netherland " make use of 
French beans of different colors, which they plant among 
their Maize. . . . The Maize stalks serve, instead of the poles 
which we use in our Fatherland, for the beans to grow upon " 
(De Vries, Voyages, transl. in 2 N. Y. Hist. Soc, iii. 107). 
1653. Van der Donck, in his " Description of the New 
Netherlands," distinguishes the beans cultivated by the Indians 
before the coming of the Dutch, and the Turkish beans 
which had been introduced : " Of Beans there are several 
kinds ; but the large Windsor bean [ Vicia Faba] . . . and 
the Horse-bean will not fill out their pods. . . . The Turkish 
beans which our people have introduced there grow wonderfully. 
. . . Before the arrival of the Netherlanders [1614] 
the Indians raised beans of various kinds and colours, but generally 
too coarse to be eaten green or to be pickled, except 
the blue sort, which are abundant," etc. He then describes 
the Indian mode of planting beans with maize, ut supra 
(N. Y. Hist. Soc. Coll., 2 Ser., i. 188-9). This is the only 
reference we have found to the introduction of any species of 
Bhaseolus into North America. Van der Donck's book was 
written more than forty years after Hudson's coming, and the 
author first arrived in New Netherland in 1642. His statement 
as to the introduction by the Dutch of the best kind of 
" Turkish beans " for " snaps," salad, or pickling, is not to 
be accepted without reserve ; but the fact that Turkish beans 
" grow wonderfully, fill out remarkably well, and are much 
cultivated," while the imported Windsor beans [ Vicia Faba] 
and horse-beans proved failures, is to be noted. 
Wood, who was in Massachusetts from 1629 to 1633, says 
that the Indians "in winter-time have all manner of fowles, 
Indian beanes, and clams" (N. E. Prospect, pt. 2, ch. 6). 
Eoger Williams, 1643, gives the Indian name of these beans 
in the Narragansett dialect : " Manusqussed-ash " (plural) ; 
Cotton's Massachusetts vocabulary (1727-8) has (sing.) 
" Monasquisset, an Indian bean ; " President Stiles, about 
1760, heard the name in the Pequot dialect as " Mushquissedes" 
(MS. Vocab.) ; Zeisberger, 1776 and 1803, wrote it 
in the Delaware, with dialectic modification, " Malachxit ; " 
and we can trace it in the modern Shyenne " Monisk " (Hayden's 
Vocab., 1862) and " Monchka." In the Chippeway, the 
kidney-bean has received — probably from some local variety 
— a different name: " Miskodissimin," i. e. "red-dyed seed 
(or fruit) ; " and this name, modified as " M'skochi-tha," was 
used by the Shawanees of Ohio. 
To return to New England, Josselyn, who was in this country, 
1638—9, and again, 1663-71, in his catalogue of " plants 
proper to the country," names " Indian beans, falsely called 
French beans :" "the herbalists call them kidney-beans, from 
their shape and effects. . . . They are variegated much [in 
size and color] ; besides your Bonivis and Calavances, and the 
kidney-bean that is proper to Eoanoke : but these are brought 
into the country : the others are natural to the climate " (N. 
E. Earities, p. 56 ; Voyages, p. 73-4). Here is reference to 
at least two species of American beans, one " proper to New 
England," the other from Eoanoke — perhaps P. multiflorus. 
Besides the names already mentioned — "Monasquisset," 
with its variants — there is another, in northern Algonkin languages, 
for kidney-beans, which must have originally belonged 
to some high-twining variety. Eliot used it, in the plural, for 
"beans" in 2 Samuel, xvii. 28, tuppuhquam-ash — which literally 
signifies " twiners ;" and Easles (1691-1700) gave, in 
the "Kennebec-Abnaki " of Maine, for "faseole," a'-tehaPhwe 
— from the same root. A modern Abnaki vocabulary shows 
that this name is still in use — as " ad-ba-kwa." 
As to the American origin of P. lunatus, the Lima bean 
and its varieties, there seems now to be no question. "It is 
evidently," says M. De Candolle (p. 276), " a Brazilian species, 
dispersed by cultivation, and perhaps long ago naturalized, 
here and there, in tropical America." 
But as to the origin of P. vulgaris he is not free from 
doubt. He finds " (1) that this species was not cultivated in 
ancient times in the East Indies, the southwest of Asia, or 
Egypt ; (2) that we are not absolutely certain that it was 
known in Europe before the discovery of America ; (3) that 
at that epoch the number of varieties suddenly increased in 
the gardens of Europe, and all authors began to speak of it ; 
(4) that the majority of species of this genus are found in 
South America ; and (5) that seeds which apparently belong 
to this species have been found in Peruvian tombs [at Ancon] 
of a date somewhat uncertain, mixed with many other species, 
all of which are American." (p. 275.) 
The proof that P. vulgaris (and P. nanus), in varieties 
almost innumerable, were cultivated by the natives of America 
before the coming of Europeans, seems to be conclusive. 
The resolution of M. De Candolle's doubts as to the American 
origin of the species must depend chiefly on the identification 
of the species known as Phaseoli (PhaseK, Fagiuoli, Fesoles, 
etc.), in Europe, before the discovery of America. This 
identification may not be impossible, but the space at our 
disposal will not permit us to attempt it in this article, or even 
to reexamine the authorities on which M. De Candolle admits 
the probability " that the Dolichos of Theophrastus was our 
pole bean {haricot a rames), and the Fasiolos our cultivated 
bush bean {haricot nain)," p. 271. At present, we have 
only to offer one or two notes. 
1. The distinction indicated by Galen (De Alimentis, lib. i. 
cc. 25, 28) between the Phasiolos (c^aoAXo;) of Dioscorides 
and Phaselus {<bdo~n\os) — presumably the " vilis faselus " of 
Virgil —if well founded, seems to have been lost sight of in 
the middle ages. In Italy, the Greek and Latin names 
Phasiolos, Faseolus, Faselus, Fasillus, etc., passed into the 
modern Fagiuoli. Piero de' Crescenzi, of Bologna, whose 
treatise on agriculture was written near the beginning of the 
14th century, in Latin, and translated into Italian about 
1350, mentions, among field plants, Faseoli (Fagiuoli), as 
well known ; " some of them are red, some white. . . . They 
are planted conveniently among panick, millet, and chick 
pease ; they are also planted in gardens, among cabbages and 
onions." 1 It is not certain that the red and the white were 
of the same species, or genus, or that either was a species of 
Phaseolus, L. In the first half of the sixteenth century the 
white Phaseoli were the more common and less esteemed. 
The young and tender pods were eaten, with the included 
seeds, in salads, or boiled with other vegetables. 
Two other early figures show that the Faseoli were not so 
"well known " to the herbalists of the 15th and beginning of 
the 16th century as to Crescenzi in the 14th. One is from 
a Venice edition of the " Hortus Sanitatis," 1511 ; the other 
from the " Tacuini Sanitatis" of Elluchasem Elimithar, Strasburg, 
1531, p. 49. They are equally unlike the modern 
Phaseolus, the earlier figure in Crescenzi, and each other. 
The second may have originally been intended for a Teasel 
{Bipsacus sylvestris), the Virga jiastoris of the herbalists. 
Calepin's Dictionary (ed. 1616) says, s. v. Faseolus, that the 
name Fasilli is now given by the common people to " a species 
of Cicercula." This "vulgaris Phaseolus" of Matthioli 2 
and other Italian botanists of the period is figured and described 
in the later editions of his commentary on Dioscorides, 3 
1 "De Agricultural lib. iii. c. 10 (Italian, Ed. Venice, 1504). The Latin 
text was first printed at Strasburg in 1471, and with figures, 1486 ; the 
Italian version was printed at Florence, 1478. The figure of Faseolus in 
the earliest (Latin) edition we have seen, without date, but probably of 
Louvain, about 1480, has little resemblance to the Phaseolus of modern 
botany. 
M. De Candolle remarks (p. 272) that "authors of the 15th century 
say nothing of Faseolus, or any analogous name," and that " this is the 
case with P. Crescenzi," — referring to a French translation of Crescenzi, 
printed in 1539, which we have not seen. 
2 " Vulgares Phaseoli, quibus passim in cibis vescimur, dum satis in campis 
virent, non repant," etc., Matth. " Apologia adv. Amathum," 1559, 
p. 33; " Vulgaris usus Phaseolus." Ibid. 31. 
3 Ed. C. Bauhin, 1598, p. 341. In the earlier edition (Venice, 1559, p. 
as having an erect stem, ternate leaves, white flowers, kidneyshaped 
seeds, white, "except the umbilicus, which grows 
black." It may be worth noting that " a black spot in the 
place of the cotyledon " was a characteristic of the Faseoli 
described by Albertus Magnus (13th cent.), which appears 
to M. De Candolle " to be the dwarf Haricot {P. nanus) of 
our epoch." This black spot is more strongly suggestive of 
Dolichos than of any known variety of P. vulgaris : e. g. 
Bolichos unguiculatus, L. (French, B. Mongette, Banette, 
Haricot cornille) — not mentioned by M. De Candolle, but 
much cultivated in Italy, and of which there are a great number 
of varieties — which has seeds " marked by a prominent 
black spot about the umbilicus." 1 
2. M. De Candolle (p. 272), with a reference to Delile and 
to Piddington's " Index," remarks that though " no Hebrew 
name corresponding to the Dolichos or Phaseolus of the botanists 
" is known, yet " a name less ancient, because it is 
Arabic, namely ' Loubia,' is found in Egypt for the Bolichos 
Lubia J and in Hindustani, under the form 'Loba,' for Phaseolus 
vulgaris." This name seems to be clearly referable to 
the Greek. It has not been traced earlier than to Jahia ebn 
Serapion —an Arabian physician of the 9th or 10th century 
— whose work " De Simplicibus," compiled chiefly from Dioscorides 
and Galen, was translated into Latin in the 15th century 
2 In a chapter (lxxxi) on "Lubia," i. e. "Faseoli," he 
quotes from Dioscorides the description of Smilax hortensis 
{xoTraia <rp.l\aF) " whose seeds some call Lobia ; " and it is 
evident that the name Lubia (as it was transliterated from 
the Arabic text by the translator) was transferred to the 
264), Phaseolus is figured as a low, bushy, and spreading, but not twining 
plant. 
1 Several other species of Dolichos (e. g., D. sesquipedalis L., Ital. " Fagiuolo 
Sparagio," Engl. " Asparagus bean ") are similarly marked. Vilmorin-Andrieux 
et Cie., " Les Plantes Potageres," 1883, p. 280. Other 
names for this species are : Germ. " Ostindische Riesel-Spargel Bohne " 
"Nagelische Fasel p' Ital. "Fagiuolo dell' ocehio ;" Span. " Garrubia " 
" Moneheta," " Judia de Careta." 
2 Milan, 1473, and Venice, 1479 ; but better known to botanists of the 
16th century in the Strasburg edition of 1531, edited by Otho Brunfels. 
Arabic from the Greek of Dioscorides. It is probable, to say 
the least, that it has been rightly appropriated to Bolichos 
Lubia, Forskal (De Candolle, 278), rather than to any species 
of Phaseolus. 
The length to which our annotations have extended forbids 
all notice of the third part of this book. This, however, is 
very brief. It contains a tabulation of the plants of cultivation, 
and of the results of the preceding discussion of them ; 
also an article on the regions in which the principal species 
have originated or have been brought into cultivation, in which 
it is stated that of the 247 species under investigation the Old 
World has furnished 199, and America 45, leaving three 
which are doubtful in this regard ; and the extreme poverty 
of the southern hemisphere beyond the tropics is a striking 
feature. An article on the number and nature of species 
cultivated at different periods is noteworthy. So, also, is the 
enumeration of the cultivated plants which are unknown in 
a wild state ; from which it is gathered that 27 species have 
never been found wild by any botanist, 27 more are doubtful 
in this respect, while 193 are of recognizable origin. 
Of the " Reflexions diverses," at the close, we note only the 
final one, that "In the history of cultivated plants I have 
found no indication of communications between the inhabitants 
of the Old and New World anterior to the discovery of America 
by Columbus. The Scandinavians, who had carried their 
expeditions to the northern United States, and the Basques of 
the Middle Ages, who had extended their whaling voyages 
perhaps to America, would appear not to have transported 
a single cultivated species. The Gulf-stream has equally been 
without effect. Between America and Asia two transportations 
may have been effected, one by man (the Batatas), the 
other either by man or by the sea (Cocoa-nut)." 
Berhaps the Banana should be ranked with the Sweet 
Botato in this regard. And we may merely conjecture that 
the Purslain came to our eastern coast with the Scandinavians 
or the Basques. 
BENTHAM AND HOOKER'S GENERA PLANTARUM. 
The completion of this great work 1 marks an era in systematic 
botany. As the senior author is nearly eighty-three 
years of age, we may say that, essentially, it brings to a 
worthy close the long course of scientific labors of the most 
accomplished, sagacious, and continuously industrious phytologist 
of our day, almost the only survivor of those who 
personally knew Antoine Laurent Jussieu, and were associated 
with the elder De Candolle ; one whose line of authorship, 
begun in the year 1826 (antedated only by that of the 
venerable Roeper), comes down to the present year, apparently, 
in almost unabated vigor, and is as remarkable for 
sustained importance as it is unparalleled in length. Upon 
the junior author, who should not yet feel the burden of years, 
however weighted with official cares, and upon such specialists 
as can be mustered, may devolve the responsibility of such 
addimenta as may be needed to bring the earlier volumes up 
to the date of the last, and even to supplement the work from 
time to time, as the " Genera Plantarum " of Linnaeus was 
supplemented by successive editors. But it is not probable 
that the task which has now been happily accomplished will 
be undertaken again, still less executed, before the twentieth 
century is well entered upon. Useful couqDilations we may 
expect, and monographs which may here and there better represent 
advancing knowledge of particular groups ; but a 
production like this, covering the whole field of phaanogamous 
botany, ordinally and generically, and with the uniformity of 
treatment and scale thus secured by two close associates in 
one continuous work, cannot be looked for again for a long 
while. 
It has few predecessors. The first " Genera Plantarum " 
in fact (though not exactly in name) was that of Tournefort, 
published in the year 1700. Then and there, as Linnaeus de- 
1 Genera Plantarum ad Exemplaria imprimis in herbariis Kewensibus 
servata definita. Auctoribus G. Bentham et J. D. Hooker. Londini, 1862-1883. 
(The Nation, No. 942, July 19, 1883.) 
clared, genera of plants, in the sense of scientific botany, were 
first established. There would probably be more recognition 
of this dictum if the present work were to be planned anew, 
and the genera which Linnaeus himself admitted as of Tournefort, 
along with those which modern botanists have restored, 
could have been attributed to this real founder, without 
thereby compromising the proper position to hold in respect 
to herbalistic and ancient names. The second " Genera 
Plantarum " was that of Linnaeus, in 1737, of which the 
last edition revised by the author himself was that of 1767. 
The third was that of Jussieu, " secundum ordines naturales 
disposita," which appeared in the year 1789. That of Endlicher 
— a monument of literary or bibliographical erudition 
rather than of botanical research — was brought out in the 
main between 1836 and 1843, at about the same time with 
the more unpretending synoptical compilation of Meisner. 
These were important in their way. But the " Genera Plantarum 
" of Bentham and Hooker, which began to be issued 
in the year 1862 and was finished in the spring of the present 
year, is the lineal successor of the three classical works above 
mentioned, that of Tournefort representing the botany of the 
close of the seventeenth century ; that of Linnaeus the first 
half, and that of Jussieu the latter part, of the eighteenth 
century. The present work — increased from the one small 
octavo of Linnaeus to three thick imperial octavo volumes of 
nearly 1200 pages each — stands in like relation to the nineteenth 
century, and is based, like them, or even more than 
they, upon actual investigation, and upon the comparison of 
a vastly greater number of original types than was formerly 
possible. 
Unlike its predecessors, however, — and in this respect 
agreeing with the other great botanical work of the century, 
the " Prodromus " of De Candolle, — the whole of cryptogamic 
botany is omitted. This vast field must be left to 
specialists. Fries, 'of Upsala, who died a few years ago at 
a ripe old age, was the last phaenogamic botanist who was at 
the same time master of one or two cryptogamic orders ; and 
now even the best of cryptogamists can hardly aspire to more 
than a general and superficial acquaintance with any other 
department than the one to which he devotes himself. This 
inevitable state of things has its disadvantages. The reasons 
for it do not really apply to the Ferns and their allies, and it 
was naturally expected, as it is much to be desired, that these 
should enter into the present work. May we hope that this 
still may be ? 
Some idea of the progressive enlargement of the field may 
be had by a comparison of the number of genera characterized 
in these successive works. The phsenogamous genera of 
Linnseus, " Gen. PL," ed. 1, A. d. 1737, were . . 887 
" ed. 6, a. d. 1761, "... 1,189 
Jussieu, " . . . . a. d. 1789, "... 1,707 
Endlicher, " . . . . a. d. 1843, " (about) 0,400 
Bentha m &) ..... A . D . 1883 «... 7,585 
Hooker, > 
If the last had been elaborated upon the scale of Endlicher, 
or with the idea of genera which is still common if not prevalent, 
the number of genera would have amounted to at least 
ten thousand. An estimate of the number of known species 
of each genus and higher group has been made throughout 
the work — a rough approximation only, mentioning first the 
number in the books, and the number to which, in the opinion 
of the authors, these may probably be reduced by botanists 
who adhere to the Linnaean view of species ; from which 
it appears that upon the very strictest estimate their number, 
as now known to botanists, is at least 95,620. In round 
numbers, it may fairly be said that about 100,000 species of 
phamogamous plants are in the hands of botanists. The five 
largest orders, as well for genera as for species, are the following, 
and in this rank : Compositm, Beguminosm, Orchidem, Rubiacem, 
Graminem. The high standing of the Orchid family 
in the list will be a surprise to many. Linnaeus knew only a 
hundred species ; five thousand is now a moderate estimate 
— about half as many as there are of Compositm, which hold 
to their proportion of one tenth of the whole. In both families 
every country and district is largely peculiar in its species 
and types. The far greater prominence of Compositm 
over Orchids is owing to the vast number of individuals in the 
former, their paucity in the latter. 
Those who desire to know the respective parts which the 
two authors have taken in the elaboration of the " Genera 
Plantarum " may be referred to a short article on the subject 
in a recent number of the " Journal of the Linmean Society 
of London." Great thanks from all botanists are due to them 
both. 
BOTANICAL NOMENCLATURE. 
Sixteen years have passed since M. De Candolle laid 
before the International Botanical Congress held at Baris, 
August 16-26, 1867, a body of Laws of Botanical Nomenclature, 
which he had drawn up for consideration by that 
assembly. The code was discussed by a special committee, 
afterward by the congress in full session, some modifications 
introduced, and it was then all but unanimously voted, " by 
about one hundred botanists of all countries A' " That these 
laws, as adopted by this assembly, shall be recommended as 
the best guide for nomenclature in the vegetable kingdom." 
The adopted code, with an extended commentary, was published 
by De Candolle early in the autumn of the same year ; 
and an English translation, made by the lamented Dr. Wedded, 
appeared early in 1868. The " Laws," but without the 
more voluminous explanatory commentary, were reprinted 
from the English translation in this Journal in July of that 
year, occupying only twelve pages ; and some remarks and 
suggestions by the present writer were appended. As was 
then said, the code did not make, but rather declared, the common 
law of botanists. It announced principles, systematically 
and perspicuously, and indicated their application in leading 
cases ; but many practical questions, as wdl as conflicts of 
1 Nouvelle Remarques sur la Nomenclature Botanique. Par M. Alphonse 
De Candolle. Geneva, 1883. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 
3 ser., xxvi. 417.) 
rules in particular instances, which would inevitably come up, 
were necessarily left to be settled when they arose. No small 
discussion upon certain details has indeed ensued, in which 
our author, naturally appealed to, has taken an active part. 
In the first part of the present publication (of 79 pages 
8vo), the discussions of the intervening years are summed up 
and reviewed ; and a few changes, which experience has shown 
the need of, are proposed. In the second part the author 
takes up certain questions which the Paris Congress left untouched, 
such as the nomenclature of organs (which he treated 
in his recent " Phytographie "), the nomenclature of fossils, 
and the rules according to which names and authorities should 
be cited when old genera are combined or reconstituted ; also 
some matters of orthography and punctuation are briefly considered. 
Finally, in the third part, the laws adopted by the 
Paris Congress are reprinted, with the suggested changes. 
The alterations and additions are printed in italic type, so 
that they may be seen at a glance. 
We are not sure of an English edition ; and in any case it 
is desirable to make so important a publication as this generally 
known to our own naturalists. So our abstract and comments 
may run to some length. They are intended partly to illustrate 
and reinforce the author's doctrine, in respect to matters 
upon which there is still diversity of opinion and practice, 
perhaps occasionally to offer a criticism or suggestion ; also 
as helps and guides to botanists in our own country, who are 
beginning to take interest in such matters and to feel (or at 
least to show) the need of giving attention to them. 
As respects all the weightier matters of the law, the most 
experienced phamogamous botanists are in general agreement. 
Having accepted the code of 1867, they will be ready to accept 
proposed modifications and interpretations which are in 
accordance with its principles. Among them all, perhaps no 
one is so well qualified as De Candolle, by the bent of his 
mind and course of his studies, his opportunity of leisurely 
consideration, and his long editorial experience — combining, 
as it may be said to do, that of two generations, — for declaring 
what the present consensus of authority is, and for 
discussing the cases which still need adjustment, some of them 
of considerable consequence in phytography. 
At the head of the publications upon nomenclature emanating 
from or sanctioned by associations or committees of 
naturalists which have appeared since the year 1867, De Candolle 
places the Eeport to the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, at the Nashville meeting, 1877, on 
Nomenclature in Zoology and Botany, prepared by Captain 
Dall, after much conference with leading American naturalists. 
The differences between these rules and those of the 
botanical code relate mainly to questions mooted by the zoologists, 
whose systems and views had been comparatively loose 
and variant. The first alteration in De Candolle's revised 
draft is adopted from Dall's report, with high commendation, 
namely : — 
"Art. 3. The essential point in all parts of nomenclature is : 
1. Fixity in names ; 2. Avoidance or rejection of forms or 
names which may create error or ambiguity or introduce confusion 
into science." The " fixity in names " is taken from 
the American code, and is said to supply a real omission. 
Although merely declaratory, some practical consequences flow 
from it. The same idea dominates in the report made by 
Douville, chairman of a committee of the Geological Congress 
at Bologna in 1881, and which concerned itself with nomenclature 
in palaeontology. This report insists that " The law of 
priority being fundamental in nomenclature, it appears to be 
necessary to apply it with all possible generality and to suppress 
derogations and exceptions to this law. . . . Contradiction 
between the signification of a name and the characters of 
a genus or species is no sufficient reason for changing such 
a name," etc. 
Another code referred to is one by a committee of the Zoological 
Society of France, in 1881, M. Chaper, chairman, in 
which this principle of fixity is said to be less prominent, 
more exceptions being allowed. 
On reviewing the whole field, De Candolle assures us that 
the tendency during the last sixteen years has been : 1, to an 
increasing agreement of the zoologists with the botanists ; 
and 2, an increasing recognition of the law of priority as the 
fundamental principle of nomenclature, and as prevailing 
over considerations of elegance, linguistic purity, and precise 
meaning. But some recent publications of individual botanists 
look the other way ; notably so two publications by 
Saint-Lager, " Eeforme de la Nomenclature Botanique," and 
" Nouvelles Bemarques sur la Nomenclature Botanique," published 
at Lyons, in the Annals of the Botanical Society of 
that city ; of which it may be said, that the reflex effect of 
the multitudinous changes proposed in the view of making 
old and accepted names better, more classical, or more significant, 
has greatly strengthened the hands of those who contend 
for the absolute fixity and unalterableness of published names. 
Whether and to what extent misspelled or otherwise wrongly 
formed names may be corrected, and whether in some cases 
the principle of fixity should not prevail over absolute priority, 
are matters which may be discussed further on. We take up 
in the author's order the points which we wish to specify or 
to comment on. 
Article 6 of the code declares that " scientific names should 
be in Latin. When taken from another language, a Latin 
termination is given to them except in some cases sanctioned 
by custom." Here our author asks, " But what is Latin ? " 
He concludes that the Latin of Linnaeus should be the model. 
It is the classical language of botany, and is much more precise 
than the Latin of antiquity, in which very many words 
bear two, three, or half a dozen senses, either in the same or 
in different ages ; while in the technical language of botany 
each word has but one meaning, and each idea or object is expressed 
by a single term. De Candolle elaborated this point 
in his " Phytographie," to which he refers for illustrations ; 
and he returns to it in special applications when commenting 
on article 66, as we shall see. But, in fact, even technical 
language cannot always avoid ambiguities and the use of 
words in senses which have to be determined by the context. 
Folium, for example, in botanical description, may mean the 
blade of a leaf only, or this along with its petiole, or blade 
with petiole and stipules together, or it may even mean any 
homologue of the ordinary leaf. 
" Art. 15. Each natural group of plants can bear in science 
but one valid designation, the most ancient, whether 
adopted or given by Linnaeus, or since Linnaeus, — provided it 
be consistent with the essential rules of nomenclature." De 
Candolle now adds an article 15 bis , which is purely explanatory, 
but has a bearing upon subordinate questions. It is : " The 
designation of any group, by one or more names, has not for 
its object the enunciation of its characters or history ; it gives 
merely the name by which we are to call it." He comments 
upon the tendency which is often shown to mix up the question 
of name with other considerations. Before Linnaeus 
introduced the binomial system, the names of species were 
at the same time names and characters. In separating these 
two things, Linnaeus rendered a great service, and we should 
be careful to preserve this advantage. " A name is a name ; 
characters are characters; the succession of names is synonymy. 
To mingle such different ideas leads to confusion. 
In these days there is a disposition to attribute too much importance 
to the meaning of names, and also to intermix the 
synonymy —i. e., the bibliographical history of the groups — 
with the names, at least with the indication of the author, 
which being commonly annexed comes to be almost a part of 
the same. Such complications are contrary to the general 
principle that different ideas should be expressed separately. 
If this rule is neglected, we may be led into attempts to express 
in the name, or with the name, the phytogenitic history 
of a group, that being just now one of the ideas in vogue." 
Names that have an appropriate meaning are very well, and 
botanists always endeavor to make such ; but experience 
shows that meaningless names are in some respects better — 
are generally better than names founded on ideas, which in 
the progress of knowledge often become false. 1 
De Candolle's main remarks upon article 15 relate to the 
1 Or may be essentially false from the beginning. One of our common 
Maples has two names, Acer dasycarpum and A. eriocarpum, both signifying 
that the fruit is woolly, whereas it is perfectly glabrous ; only the 
ovaries are woolly, yet no botanist has ever proposed to change the received 
name, — which is remarkable. 
point of departure for the law of priority in botany. The 
names of the two great classes, Monocotyledones and Dicotyledones, 
are of Bay in 1703, who scientifically distinguished 
and named them. The counterpart, Acotyledones, is of Jussieu 
(1789), and to all three names our author would apply 
the law of priority. That the name Acotyledones fails to 
express the true character is a small objection. This is only 
an example of the disadvantage of significant names, which 
may lose aptness in the advance of knowledge. Far better 
are such names as Aves, Bisces, Vermes, etc., which time and 
discovery can never falsify. Cryptogamia as the name of a 
class (which for meaning is hardly so good as Acotyledones) 
was introduced by Linnaeus in 1735, and has maintained its 
place. 1 The counterpart, Phanerogamia (or Phaenogamia), 
is not of Linnaeus, but much later. Natural Families or 
Orders date from Jussieu's " Genera Plantarum," in 1789 ; 
Cohorts and Tribes, from A. P. De Candolle's " Systema," 
1818. Subgenera begin with B. Brown, in 1810, according to 
our author. There are a few instances (without the name) 
in the " Brodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae." But it is in the 
Oudney and Denham-Clapperton paper, in 1826 (p. 16), that 
their use is discussed, and the mode of designating them in 
citation by interpolation between generic and specific name 
in parenthesis, is introduced. Species (as distinguished from 
varieties) and the actual binomial nomenclature date from 
1753, and the first edition of the " Species Plantarum." There 
is substantial agreement among botanists as to this point of 
departure ; and the fact that the specific phrase of earlier 
authors is occasionally of a single substantive does not militate 
against it. Galega vulgaris, Bappa major, and Trifolium 
agrarium of the old herbalists were in good binomial form ; 
but the adjectives are phrases, not specific names. 
Generic names bring in a question of interpretation and 
usage. In his table De Candolle makes the point of departure 
for priority, Linnaeus, " Genera Plantarum," ed. 1, 1737. All 
1 On p. 58 De Candolle has collected nineteen synonyms of the name 
Cryptogamia, all of later date, and specified the objections which may be 
brought against each of them, besides that of want of priority. 
agree, or should agree, that no anterior name has right of 
priority to a Linnaean name or to a name adopted by Linnaeus. 
But as respects generic names adopted by him, are we 
to follow Linnaeus or are we not ? He says, " Tournefortius 
primus characteres genericos ex lege artis condidit." And in 
the " Genera Plantarum " : " Ipsi non immerito inventionis 
gloriam circa genera concedere debeam," — and so he uniformly 
accredits to Tournefort the generic names adopted 
from him ; and the same as to " Plumerius, . . . Vaillantius, 
Dillenius, . . . Michelius et pauci alii," "qui ejus vestigia 
pressernnt." De Candolle remarks that Tournefort had the 
merit which Linnaeus ascribes, but that "he kept a good 
many adjective names for genera (Acetosa, Bermudiana, 
etc.)." Since Linnaeus did not adopt these, they are out of 
the present question. Moreover, not to speak here of a score 
or two of really adjective generic names, Linnaeus himself 
adopted two which Tournefort had discarded, Mirabilis and 
Impatiens, and deliberately made another, Gloriosa, in place 
of a proper name, Methonica, of a sort which, though not of 
the best, is now regarded as next to the best. But it is completely 
understood that Linnaeus is not to be corrected ; so 
Gloriosa, Impatiens, etc., remain. 
Are we equally to follow Linnaeus in regard to names which 
he adopted from Tournefort and a few later authors, some 
of them his own contemporaries ? If so, we shall continue to 
write Salicornia, Tourn., Corispermum, A. Juss., Olea, Tourn., 
Justicia, Houst., Dianthera, Gronov., Lycopus, Tourn., Linnaea, 
Gronov. The practice of the leading botanists has been 
essentially uniform in this respect, from Jussieu down to De 
Candolle, father and son, even to the latest volume of the 
" Monographia," published during the current year. It seems 
perfectly clear therefore — although we believe that the question 
is not raised in this revision — that such genera are expected 
still to be cited as of their respective founders. And, 
as hardly any one doubts that Tournef ortian genera suppressed 
by Linnaeus but restored by modern botanists (such as Fagopyrum) 
are to be cited " Tourn.," it follows that only in a 
restricted sense do genera begin with Linnaeus in the year 
1737. This case, indeed, is governed by the principle in 
citation, so well insisted on by M. De Candolle, that no author 
is to be represented as saying the thing that he does not say. 
The alternative course is to write " Linnaea, Linn.," which is 
certainly what Linnaeus has not said. The only authors we 
know of who have on principle followed this alternative — 
and a notable exception it is — are Bentham and Hooker in 
the new " Genera Plantarum," against which a protest was 
made in this Journal when the first part was issued. They 
have followed the rule that botanical genera began with Linnajus 
so strictly as to cite even authors as recent as Gaertner 
for Tournefortian genera and to ignore botanists like Gronovius, 
contemporary with Linnaeus, and publishing since the 
year 1737 ; and it is only by an infraction of their rule that 
they have avoided writing Linnaea, Linn. 
No change of rule 15 seems actually required to bring it 
into unison with the almost universal practice in citation. 
We have only to understand that genera adopted by Linnaeus 
from Tournefort, etc., and so accredited, should continue to 
be thus cited ; that the date 1737 (Linnaeus, " Genera," ed. 
1) is, indeed, the point of departure from which to reckon 
priority, yet that botanical genera began with Tournefort ; so 
that Tournefortian genera which are accepted date from the 
year 1700. That is the limit fixed by Linnaeus, and it definitely 
excludes the herbalists and the ancients whose writings 
may be consulted for historical elucidation, but not as authority 
for names. 
Upon articles 21 and 22, which give rules for the names 
of orders and other supra-generic groups, our author offers 
no new remarks. We venture to offer two. It being the 
general rule that acem is the proper termination for ordinal 
names which take their appellation from a typical genus, it 
is desirable to conform to it as fully as well may be. 1 Since 
Saxifragacem, Myrsineacecc, Styracacem, Gentianacem, Nyctaginacem, 
and even Lauracem and Juglandacem were adopted 
1 Cruciferce, Leguminosce, Umbelliferm, Compositm, Labiates, and the like, 
are no exception to the rule, rightly stated, as they are not named from 
typical genera. We shall not have any more of them, but the old ones 
in use are among the best. 
in the " Prodromus," it seems to us retrograde and unadvisable 
to have gone back in the new " Genera Plantarum " to 
Saxifragem, and the like ; and this upon no obvious principle, 
as we have Samydacem, Cornacem, etc., brought into 
harmony with the rule. And if in the " Prodromus " we 
have Styracacem, why not also Salicacem ? And if, in the 
" Genera Plantarum," Styrax could take the acem termination 
as Styracecß, why not as Styracacem ? If it be objected 
that some such terminations have an unclassical aspect, this 
objection applies all the more to the cases under our second 
remark : Namely, that too rigid adherence to the rule that 
names of suborders, tribes, etc., shall end in -em and the like, 
gives us nearly unpronounceable words of four or five consecutive 
vowels, or, when the diphthongs are printed in separate 
letters, according to a prevalent fashion, one or two 
more. Of these — the diphthongs written out — Sauraujeac, 
Spiraeeae, Catesbaeeae, Jaumeeae, Thymleeeae, and Moraeeae 
are the worst instances, and would justify any infraction of 
rules. 1 The last, and one of the worst, would have been 
avoided by writing the ordinal name Iridacem when that of 
the tribe would have been Iridcce. Names are to be spoken 
as well as read, and botanists who have to teach think more 
of these things than those who only write. 
At the head of his remarks upon generic names (art. 25 
et seq.), our author commends to other naturalists the very 
clear directions given in the rules for Zoological Nomenclature, 
edited by Dall, for rendering Greek letters into Latin 
in the construction of generic and specific names. He notes, 
however, that the rendering of 17 by e is not in full accordance 
with Latin usage, as witness bibliotheca, dialectica, Hecubea, 
etc. 
1 Far better to write Spirceacem, with De Candolle. The use of this 
termination for tribal names need not be objected to by those who take 
little pains to use it for orders. And those of us who are careful so to 
employ it, would prefer its occasional use for tribes and suborders to the 
concatenation of vowels, which it is not easy to write and almost impossible 
to pronounce. Some quite unnecessary tribal names in acem, such as 
Vernoniacea. and Eupatoriacece, adopted by De Candolle from Lessing, are 
kept up, although exceptional. 
366 
REVIEWS. 
Article 28 of the code, which is reprinted without alteration 
or comment, consists of a series of recommendations of 
points to be attended to in the construction of generic names. 
As such names are to be " in Latin," it would have been well 
to recommend that in their formation from the Greek, from 
which most of them are nowadays drawn, the principles of 
Latin prosody should not be wholly ignored. Such names as 
Trichocladus and Ancistrocladus would have been euphonious 
as Trichocladia and Ancistrocladia, and very little longer. 
Acanthopanax, Didymopanax, Dimorphochlamys, Trigonochlamys, 
Aulacocalyx, Pellacalyx, Microcharis, and the like, 
are harder to pronounce than the makers probably thought ; 
and so of many others. 
One of the actual recommendations is " Eviter les noms adjectifs." 
This in Weddell's version is translated, "To avoid 
adjective nouns:" doubtless a wrong translation. Adjective 
nouns we take to be substantives which are directly formed 
from adjectives. Not many such are likely to be made for 
genera ; but if such good ones can be constructed as those we 
already have in Nigella, Amarella, Flaveria, Chlora, Bubia, 
Leucas, and Hyptis, they will not be objected to. Clearly 
the recommendation is to avoid adjective names for genera. 
That may be done for the future, but has not been done in 
the past. They are contrary to the rule of Linnaeus, but not 
to his practice. Not to refer again to Gloriosa, Mirabilis, and 
Impatiens, at least two score of obviously adjective names for 
genera may be counted in the first edition of the " Genera 
Plantarum," — such as Arenaria, Stellaria, Utricularia, Dentaria, 
Asperula, Angelica, Trientalis, Pedicularis, Digitalis, 
and from the Greek such as Polycarpon. Amphicarpum and 
Mitracarpum are recent names of this kind. To conform the 
rule to the fact it w r ere better to state that : generic names are 
either substantives or adjectives which may be used as substantives, 
the latter mostly feminine in gender. Angelica is 
understood to be Planta Angelica, Sanguinaria, Planta sanguinaria, 
etc. 
It is recommended " to avoid making choice of names used 
in zoology." But it has become nearly impossible to follow 
this advice, nor is it now thought to be important. 
Article 33 is suppressed. It was no more than a statement 
of the custom that personal names for species were to be 
nouns in the genitive (e. g., Clusii) when the person commemorated 
was a discoverer, describer, or an illustrator of 
the species, but were in adjective form (e. g., Clusiana) when 
the name was merely complimentary. The rule sometimes 
worked awkwardly ; for many personal names do not take 
kindly to latinization in the genitive form, which are sufficiently 
euphonious as adjectives in -ana or -anum ; and it is 
well to do away with a needless restriction. 
Article 34, which recorded the fact that many names of species 
are substantives, is the subject of a few remarks, called 
out by the publication of Saint-Lager, in which it is proposed 
to change all these into adjectives, — a proposition which botanists 
are not likely ever to adopt. Some of them are among 
the best of descriptive names, e. g., Stellaria nemorum, Convolvulus 
sepium, Rhus vernix, Chammrops hystrix (and 
such should be written without a capital initial) ; those which 
are proper names, either old names of genera or of the herbalists, 
are rightly said to be significant either of the absorption 
of a former genus, or of a transference, or as preserving 
a native appellation, or as indicating a likeness. " Digitalis 
Sceptrum means a Digitalis which had been called Sceptrurn; 
" Ardisia Pickeringia, a species of this genus which, 
mistaken by Nuttall for a new one, had been named Pickeringia 
; Rudbeckia Heliopsidis, a Rudbeckia facie Ileliopsidis, 
from its resemblance to a Heliopsis. Linnaeus gave us 
many such names ; and no sufficient reason appears either for 
discarding these, or for forbidding the discreet adoption of 
new ones. But we cannot commend such a name as Senecio 
Bhot for a species indigenous to Bhotan. 
Article 36 consists of a series of recommendations for the 
formation or adoption of specific names. Its fifth sub-article 
we may refer to in another connection, namely, along with article 
48. The recommendation to " name no species after one 
who has neither discovered, nor described, nor figured, nor 
studied it in any way," should be respected ; yet there are occasions 
for departing from it, especially in case of new species 
in very large genera. Excellent and sometimes needful is 
the advice to " avoid names designating little known or very 
limited localities." We are obliged to cite — ■ happily as a 
synonym — Helenium Seminariense, published by a Brofessor 
who thought he had discovered a new species of Helenium 
in the vicinity of the " seminary," in one of our southern 
States, where he taught botany. 
Article 40 suggests that names of varieties originated in 
cultivation, and still more half-breeds and sports (so important 
for horticulturists to distinguish), should have only fancy 
names, generally vernacular, and in some form as different 
as possible from the Latin specific names of botany, — names 
which, when needful, may be appended to the botanical name 
of the species, when that is known, e. g., Pelargonium zonule, 
Mrs. Pollock. This has been seconded by the editor of the 
" Gardeners' Chronicle " and other judicious experts, and is 
slowly making its way. 
Article 42, treating of the conditions of publicity, is the 
subject of additional remarks. The rule is, that " Publication 
consists in the sale or the distribution among the public of 
printed matter, plates or autographs. It consists, likewise, 
in the sale or distribution, among the leading public collections, 
of numbered specimens, accompanied by printed or autograph 
tickets, bearing the date of the sale or distribution." 
De Candolle now remarks that distribution among the members 
of an exchange club, of collections not offered to the 
public, does not come up to the rule ; also that, as Dr. J. 
Midler states, the distribution of specimens without characters 
or any indication of the reason for calling it new, is 
nearly tantamount to announcing a species or genus in a publication, 
but without characters ; which article 46 declares 
is not publication. But the cases are not quite alike. The 
possession of the named specimen enables a botanist to ascertain 
its distinctions. A published description without access 
to specimens may or may not serve the same purpose, very 
often does not. Unfortunately an insufficient or even a 
misleading description — and we have many such to deal 
with — claims the same right of priority that a good one does. 
It is well, therefore, that publication by sufficient distribution 
of named specimens should be recognized. But the remark 
is true that, in fact, very few distributed collections fulfill all 
the requirements of article 42. 
Article 47, sect. 2, recommends botanists "to publish no 
name without clearly indicating whether it is that of an order 
or of a tribe, of a genus or of a section, of a species or of a 
variety — in short, without giving an opinion as to the nature 
of the group to which the name is given." Unless this is 
attended to, and unless citations are equally precise, — for instance, 
unless subgeneric names are cited as such and not as 
generic, and vice versa, — much confusion in synonymy and 
in indexes will ensue. 
Article 48, on the citation of the authority for generic and 
specific names, and matters herewith connected, involves questions 
which have been more disputed than any other. In the 
revised article the phrase printed in italic type is interpolated 
: " For the indication of the name or names of any group 
to be accurate and complete, and for the ready verification of 
the date, it is necessary to quote the author who first published 
the name or combination of names." ' The statement might 
1 M. De Candolle appears to insist upon this verification (or incipient 
verification) for higher groups as well as for genera and species, and 
would deprecate the not unusual custom in compendious Floras, Catalogues, 
etc., of omitting to cite the authority for orders, sub-orders, tribes, 
etc. We should agree with him if the omission was held to signify that the 
names of the groups in question, when thus simply given, were proposed 
as new. But in fact, authority is omitted, not because the groups are 
new, but because they are old and entirely familiar. Nobody will ever 
suppose that Ranunculacem, Clematidece, etc., nakedly written, are novelties. 
In this regard, the nature and plan of the publication are to be considered 
; what is necessary in a Systema or a Genera Plantarum may be 
superfluous in a local or a compendious work. Indeed it may be nearly 
impossible to assign the authority for the name of an order correctly, 
without explanation and extended references. One would wish to write, 
succinctly, Cornacem, DC, as De Candolle founded the order, but it was 
in the form Cornece. A well-known order was instituted as Onagrm, 
Juss., " Genera Plantarum," which the founder altered to Onagrarim ; 
for reasons referred to in this article we may wish to adopt the form 
Onagracem. As all this is most familiar matter, yet may not be correctly 
be simplified by omitting "or names" and "or combination 
of names," on the ground that the name of a plant is one, that 
it has a name not names, its name being the generic followed 
by the specific appellation. Ranunculus bulbosus is one 
name of two words. Our veteran botanist, Bentham, has insisted 
upon this ; and it has a bearing upon the mooted question 
of mode of citation of authority. 
The governing principle for the citation of authorship, etc., 
is well declared by De Candolle : " Never make an author say 
that which he does not say." It is difficult to go wrong when 
this principle is kept in mind, and when it is also understood 
that the appended name of an author, or its abbreviation, 
makes no part of the name of the plant, but is only the initial 
portion of its bibliography. Those who take a different view 
seem to have fallen into it by failing to distinguish strictly 
between name and history, and especially by mixing the history 
of a preceding with the statement of an actual name. 
A single example may illustrate this. When we write " Mathiola 
tristis, Brown," we give the name of a certain kind of Stock 
and the original authority for it ; and we may, when needful, 
complete the citation by adding the name of the book, with 
the volume and page, where it was first published. If, with 
some, we write " Mathiola tristis, Linn.," we make an untrue 
statement. Linnaeus had a wholly different genus Mathiola, 
and no M. tristis. If we add "sp.," and somewhere explain 
its import to be that the latter half of the name was given by 
Linnaeus, the other half remains unaccounted for. And we 
have still to seek in the synonymy for the name of the genus 
under which Linnaeus knew the plant, and also for that of the 
author who transferred it to Mathiola. If, with others, we 
write " Mathiola tristis, Linn. ( Cheiranthus) ," or " Mathiola 
tristis, Linn, {sub- Gheirantho) ," our longer phrase still wants 
stated without somewhat detailed exposition, why not in a local or condensed 
botanical book write simply Onagracem f The proper exposition is 
in place in a Genera Plantarum ; and it would have been better if Bentham 
and Hooker had critically attended to this, instead of referring 
merely to the preceding work of Endlicher. It would have added somewhat, 
yet not very much, to their great labor. 
the essential part of the citation. If, to secure this, we write 
" Mathiola tristis, Linn. {Cheiranthus, Brown)," our name, if 
it may be so called, now extended to five words and two signs 
in print, or of seven words when spoken, is still ambiguous and 
confused. It is a jumble of synonymous names and authorities, 
which become explicit and clear only when we translate it 
into "Mathiola tristis, Brown {Cheiranthus tristis, Linn.)," 
that is, into name and synonym, with respective authorities. 
This is clear and literally truthful ; the injection of the synonymy 
into the name is neither. Linnaeus reformed nomenclature 
by freeing the name from the descriptive phrase. The 
school in question would deform it by rebuilding, in another 
way (as De Candolle observes), ante-Linnaean phrases, only 
making them historical instead of descriptive. 
The practice of appending the authority to the name whenever 
the species is mentioned has been so strictly and pedantically 
adhered to that many take the former to be a part of 
the name. To obviate this impression, it might be well to 
treat the names of common plants as we do those of genera ; 
that is, to omit the reference to authorship in cases where 
there is no particular need of it. Not, however, so as to cause 
any confusion with the cases referred to in the following paragraph 
: — 
" When a botanist proposes a new name . . . it is impossible 
for him to cite an author ; consequently the absence of 
such citation suffices to show that the name of the species or 
other group is new. Linnaeus, Lamarck, De Candolle, R. 
Brown, Martius, etc., followed this course. It is then a useless 
complication of many modern naturalists to append ' mihi,' 
'nobis,' 'sp. nov.,' 'gen. nov.,' etc., to a new name. A large 
majority of species, genera, and families were published without 
these wholly personal indications." This is good as a 
general rule; but the "gen. nov." and an indication of the 
order or tribe are often needful. 
No new comments are made upon article 49, probably because 
the practice of botanists generally is conformed to it. 
The article reads : " An alteration of the constituent characters, 
or of the circumscription of a group, does not warrant the 
quotation of another author than the one that first published 
the name. . . . When the alteration is considerable, the words 
' mutatis char.,' or ' pro parte,' or ' excl. syn.,' ' excl. sp.,' etc., 
are added," etc. The translation would have been better 
worded, " does not warrant the quotation of another author in 
place of the one that first published the name." For, in fact, 
the addition of the reforming author's name to the citation 
is often warranted and helpful, sometimes is almost a necessity, 
in the case of genera. It appears that R. Brown began, 
in an oblique way, the practice objected to, and for which 
there is often a plausible excuse ; and the elder De Candolle 
sometimes followed it. It was only when the practice was 
systematically carried out by one or two authors that the consequences 
became apparent ; for few genera or species have 
now their Linnaean limits or signification, and the new rule 
was practically proved to be a necessity. 
Among the recommendations contained in article 36 was 
the following : " Readily adopt unpublished names found in 
travellers' notes or in herbaria, unless they be more or less 
defective." Guided by the practice of the elder De Candolle 
and his contemporaries, it used to be thought a duty, or at 
least a part of common courtesy, to do this, in all cases in 
which the author's approval could fairly be supposed. But 
certain inconveniences and misunderstandings have resulted, 
especially as to mode of citation, which have suggested its 
withdrawal or modification. In this Eevision, M. De Candolle 
only adds the restriction, "or unless the author has not 
in advance approved the publication." This does not alter 
the case except for living authors : their approval ought to be 
obtained or counted on ; and in respect to authors no longer 
living a botanist takes up only such names as in his opinion 
ought to be published, and which he supposes the posthumous 
author would have approved. On the whole it were probably 
better not to take up names left unpublished by a deceased 
botanist ; and De Candolle assigns good reasons for letting 
them alone. If he had modified the article decidedly in this 
sense he would have more fully expressed his own view, and 
probably have been sustained by prevalent opinion. More- 
over, he might have distinguished this practice from an essentially 
different one, namely : — 
The case of plants sent under manuscript names by a discoverer 
or an investigator to some botanist engaged in publication, 
and with a view to their publication ; of which the 
sending by Nuttall of new Umbelliferm to the elder De Candolle 
when elaborating that order for the " Prodromus," is a 
marked and not unusual instance. For this is a practice that 
need not be discouraged. Any small inconvenience that may 
arise as to mode of citation is counterbalanced by the greater 
concentration of publication, new genera and species thus 
appearing in monographs, floras, or in the papers of leading 
botanists, which otherwise would have dimly seen the light in 
obscure or local periodicals. And they are more likely to 
have proper characters assigned to them, instead of vague 
descriptions, by incompetent or unpractised hands, such as 
often try a botanist's patience. 
Article 50 treats of the mode of dealing with such names 
as the above mentioned after they have been published, i. e., 
" names published from a private document, an herbarium, a 
non-distributed collection, etc." It declares that such names 
"are individualized (Fr. precises) by the addition of the 
name of the author who publishes them, notwithstanding the 
contrary indication that he may have given." This is found 
to mean that, although the elder De Candolle gives us " Eulophus, 
Nutt.," as the name of a genus communicated by 
Nuttall, with a specimen, for the purpose of its being so published 
in the fourth volume of the " Prodromus," yet subsequent 
writers, looking only to the work it was published in, 
are to cite it as Eulophus, DC. And that the genus which 
Linnams published as " Linnaea, authore Clariss. Dr. Gronovio," 
we are to cite as Linnaea, Linn. This is not only quite 
contrary to the practice of botanists from Linnaeus down to 
De Candolle and later, but is also contrary to the golden rule 
of citation, already referred to, never to make an author say 
something different from or opposed to that which he does 
say. 
Appreciating this, the author of the code has now recast 
article 50, so as to read, " When an inedited name has been 
published (by another botanist), in attributing it to its author, 
those who afterwards mention it ought to add the name of the 
person who published it ; for example, Leptocaulis, Nutt. in 
DC. ; Oxalis lineata, Gillies in Hook." 
This is reasonable, and in the first instance such names will 
almost of necessity be so cited, must always be so cited when 
work, volume, etc., are specified. But De Candolle remarks 
that the addition will soon vanish ; for instance, " Cy?ioglossum 
ciliatum, Douglas, Mss.," published by Lehmann in " Pugillus," 
etc., and in Hooker's " Flora Boreali Americana," will 
soon come to be quoted simply as " Cynoglossum ciliatum, 
Dough," that is, just as other names are quoted. And why 
not ? Because, it is said, the name dating only from the publication, 
it is necessary to know when and where this vicarious 
publication was effected. For this "Nutt. in DC." may fairly 
serve, nearly all names published by De Candolle being contained 
in the " Prodromus." Not so, however, with " Gillies 
in Hook." Sir William Hooker published very widely, in 
periodicals, in the " Botanical Magazine," and in numerous 
independent works. In such cases the double citation gives 
little help. The experienced botanist may know where to 
look ; the inexperienced must turn to indexes at once ; for 
both these must be the final and the usual resort ; and in them 
the double has little if any advantage over the single citation. 
Moreover, if this principle is fully applied, the number of 
double-cited names may be inconveniently numerous. The 
first volume of Torrey and Gray's " Flora of North America " 
abounds in species and genera published by them for Nuttall. 
If these have all to be permanently quoted " Nutt. in Torr. 
& Gray," why not also the many species published, say by 
Bentham in De Candolle's "Prodromus," in the "Flora 
Brasiliensis," etc., and even the species published by Brown 
in the second edition of the " Hortus Kewensis," and elsewhere? 
On the whole it seems probable that these double 
citations will be used only in first or in early quotations, or in 
special instances; that it will not be deemed necessary to 
retain them when the names become settled in Floras or 
general works, except in the bibliography or full reference ; 
when of course the " leptocaulis inermis, Nutt. in DC. 
Coll. Mem. v. 39, x. 10, et Prodr. v. 107," will fully appear. 
But so long: as the abbreviated citation of the author and 
publisher together is requisite, the mode or citation recommended 
by De Candolle is the one to be employed. 
A quite different case is that of citing, as authority for a 
genus or species, the name of a botanist which is not upon 
the record. There is reason to believe that L. C. Richard 
edited the "Flora Boreali- Americana " of Michaux, and drew 
up the excellent generic and specific characters of the new 
plants in it. There is equal reason to believe that he purposely 
withheld his name. Upon no just principle of citation, 
therefore, can the name of Richard be quoted, as the 
younger Richard and Kunth essayed to do. The same holds 
for the work of Solander in the first edition of Aiton's 
" Hortus Kewensis." And if it does not hold for the contributions 
of Brown to the second edition, it is because he 
claimed them in his lifetime, rather than because they have 
been collected and republished under his name since his 
death. Only confusion will come from the admission of hypothetical 
constructive authorship. The old rule, that what 
does not appear is no better than non-existent, must apply to 
all such cases. 
In the comments upon article 52, the duty of abbreviating 
authors' names in the normal way is insisted on, and the bad 
practice of doing so by leaving out the vowels is deprecated. 
" Michx." for Michaux, which is partially shortened in this 
way, was a necessity on account of the ancient botanist 
Micheli. But "Crn." for Crouan is intolerable. Such a 
name need not be abbreviated at all. Monosyllabic names 
should rarely if ever be curtailed. "R. Br." has so long 
been used for Robert Brown that it may continue to be used, 
although " Brown " is better. In the other form, it may 
be counted among the few cases in which initial letters are 
used instead of the first syllable and first consonant of the 
second, — cases which should probably be restricted to the 
"L." for Linnaeus, "DC." for De Candolle, "H. B. K." 
for Humboldt, Bonpland, and Kunth. We are not sure that 
De Candolle would favor the latter. 
A series of remarks is made upon articles 29-66, taken 
together, — relating to names which are to be rejected or 
modified, and those which are to be maintained notwithstanding 
certain faults. As already mentioned, the tendency 
among working naturalists is to preserve names in spite of 
faults ; while a few linguistic reformers, such especially as 
M. Saint-Leger, propose changes which would affect 733 recognized 
names of species in Europe alone, and ten or twelve 
thousand in the vegetable kingdom at large, and " this after 
all the endeavors of botanists for the past half century to 
establish the law of priority and to have more stability of 
names. Sagittaria sagittifolia and Psamma arenaria must 
be changed, forsooth, because they are pleonasms ; all substantive 
specific names, because a great majority of specific names 
are adjectives, and many others because they are not sufficiently 
classical." For instance, Dianthus he would change 
to Diosanthus, Mentha to Minthe, Hydrocotyle brevipes to H. 
brevipedata, Cactus to Cactos, Arum to Aron, and so on. 
De Candolle adds, that Cicero was not so particular in Latinizing 
Greek words, as witness " barbarus," " machina," " emporium." 
As to Pirus, our author insists that even if Pyrus is 
not Latin, it is the botanical name of the genus as adopted by 
Linnaeus (from Tournefort and from all the herbalists, and 
it is old enough to be entered as an alternative form in the 
dictionaries), and so is to be preserved under the law of priority. 
There is little clanger that the reform of Saint-Leger 
will prevail. There is some danger that the reaction will so 
stiffen the rule of priority as to forbid the correction of obvious 
mistakes. See, for instance, the form in which article 
60 is now recast by De Candolle : " A generic name should 
subsist just as it was made, although a purely typographical 
error may be corrected. The termination of a Latin specific 
name may be changed to bring it into accordance with its 
generic name." From this it would seem that a slip of the 
pen and a mistaken orthography of a man's name may not 
be corrected. We trust that, when the change would not 
sensibly affect the place of a name in an index, such obvious 
corrections as of Wisteria to Wistaria may prevail. We may 
assume that the error was typographical ; for Dr. Wistar 
was at the time too well known in Philadelphia for Nuttall 
to have been ignorant of the orthography of the name. The 
correction of Balduina into Baldwinia brings it into accordance 
with the rule that personal names used for genera 
should be written as near as may be with the original orthography 
of the person's name. "Astragalus aboriginorum " 
is neither a typographical nor a clerical error. It is a hard 
rule that forbids us to write " aboriginum," still retaining 
Bichardson's name as authority. 
Botanists may take more kindly to the rule when applied 
to such names as Eleocharis and Aplopappus, in the formation 
of which the Greek aspirate was neglected. We cannot 
well suppose this to have been a typographical or clerical oversight 
on the part of Robert Brown or of Cassini. Perhaps a 
majority of botanical authors have preserved the original orthography, 
on the ground that the right of priority, like that 
of a certain king, is super grarnmaticurn, — while the remainder 
have written Heleocharis and Haplopappus ; whence 
some confusion in the indexes. The requirement to preserve 
the original form of the generic and specific names and to abide 
by the Latin of Linnaeus and his contemporaries, notwithstanding 
classical faults, enables us to retain such familiar names 
as Ranunculus acris, Lathyrus palustris and sylvestris (instead 
of R. acer, L. paluster and silvestris), and to keep up 
" laevis " for smooth, — probably to the disgust of classical 
scholars. 
M. De Candolle has a note on Diclytra of Borckhausen, 
changed into Dielytra to make it conformable to a conjectured 
meaning, and then into Dicentra that it might agree with 
the etymology given by Borckhausen himself : he gives it as a 
case in which an excess of erudition has loaded the genus with 
three names in place of one ; and he concludes, as do we, 
that it were better to have kept the original orthography, and 
have treated it as a name which had, through some mistake, 
failed of meaning. But the name having been changed into 
Dicentra on the ground that the right word kc'vtoov, and not 
the impossible word kAwjoov, must have been intended by 
Borckhausen, we think it should now be maintained, although 
it might have been left in the original form. Moreover, the 
doctrine that names must not be mended and that sense is unimportant, 
however good and needful, is so recent that it must 
not be too rigidly applied to long-standing cases. 
This consideration should not be wholly overlooked in the 
case of old and long-established genera, especially those of 
numerous species for which some obscure older name has 
come to light. Since it is impossible to make rules for the 
infraction of a rule, such cases must be left to sound discretion. 
In our opinion such discretion would forbid the transference 
of the name Stylidium from Swartz's genus to Marlea, 
and the revival of Labillardiere's transient first Candollea for 
Swartz's Stylidium. 
The fourth section of article 60, which enjoined the rejection 
" of names formed by the combination of two languages," 
is now suppressed. Nothing is put in its place; but let 
us hope that we shall not be driven to the acceptance of the 
specific name " acuticarpum " which one of our fellow-botanists 
has recently perpetrated. Although hybrid names are 
to be avoided, yet, as De Candolle remarks, they cannot consistently 
be outlawed by people who accept " centimetre," 
" decimetre," " bureaucracy," " terminology," and the like, nor 
by botanists who raise no objection to " ranunculoides," 
" scirpoides," " linnaeoides," " bauhinioides," etc. 
Names of identical meaning but of different orthography, 
as our author insists, may well enough co-exist. In a vast 
genus it might be neither inconvenient nor harmful to maintain 
species named respectively " fluviorum," " fluvialis," and 
" fluviatilis," at least if they belonged to different parts of 
the world. 
We pass to some brief annotations upon the second part 
of the publication before us, which deals with questions not 
taken up by the congress of 1867. 
The first topic is that of the nomenclature of organs, which 
was treated with some fullness in the " Phytographie." The 
remark is here repeated that the greater part of the so-called 
names of organs are only terms, that is, names indicative of 
the condition of organs or parts of the plant. For some of 
these substantive names are necessary or highly convenient, 
yet most were better provided with adjective terms only, 
which belong to terminology, not to nomenclature. Doubtless 
principles of fixity and the rule of priority should apply to 
these, both to names and to terms. But it seems unlikely 
that the phytotomists will at present heed the counsels of the 
phytographers in this matter. Yet the latter may insist that 
established names used in descriptive botany shall not be 
displaced on the pretense of getting more appropriate ones. 
For instance, the long recognized name " testa " for the outer 
seed-coat is to be discarded, because, forsooth, this covering is 
not always or even not generally a shell, or of the texture of 
earthenware. As well ask the French to discard the word 
"tete" (or "teste"), because the human head, or the skull 
which gave the name, does not really resemble a brick or 
earthen pot. 
The second is upon the nomenclature of fossils. And the 
rule is that they are named according to laws which apply to 
living plants. The Bologna congress of palaeontologists ordained 
that, to secure priority for specific names of fossils, 
they should not only be described but figured. De Candolle, 
after consultation with Heer (whose recent death we have to 
deplore), concludes that this rule is too absolute. It seems 
to us that so long as a large part of tho names of fossil plants 
are merely tentative and provisional, we should be content 
with a general approximation to the received rules of botany. 
The nomenclature of groups inferior to species (varieties, 
sub-varieties, variations and sub-variations) is considered ; but 
no new rules are proposed ; nor is the question of sub-species 
discussed. 
Although it is not exactly a matter of nomenclature, we 
should have liked that our author had considered the two 
modes of disposing of varieties, and had expressed an opinion 
as to whether the character of the species should or should not 
completely cover the variety or varieties assigned to it. In 
the former case there is a variety a, followed by B, etc. In the 
latter, the species is defined upon its type, without any special 
regard to the appended variety or varieties, which are then 
characterized as to the points in which they differ from the 
type. We prefer the latter method, as being on the whole 
clearer, and as a saving in names; avoiding the awkwardness 
or the superfluity of a varietal name for the type of the species. 
Some noteworthy observations are introduced in respect to 
the plight which systematic botany is threatened with by what 
De Candolle would call micromorphic botanists, like Jordan 
and Gandoger, who abandon the Linnaean idea of species 
altogether, and give this name and rank to what ordinary 
botanists take for sub-varieties. For example, we are informed 
that M. Gandoger divides the Roses of Europe and 
North America into 4600 species, or groups provided with 
names similar to those of species, under numerous subgenera, 
which in effect take the place of genera. Mentha has already 
undergone a similar micro-metamorphosis. If this goes on, and 
the names should be written every one, I suppose that even 
the world itself could not contain the books (or indexes) that 
should be written. The obvious and only remedy is to relegate 
this kind of botany to a world of its own, with which 
the legitimate science need have nothing to do. 
Questions having been raised as to the proper use of capital 
initials in certain specific names, M. De Candolle has devoted 
two or three pages to this and related topics. Linnaeus used 
capital initials only for substantive names ; Lamarck employed 
them for personal and some geographical names, seemingly 
without system. A. P. De Candolle used the initial capital 
systematically for all three, and even for " Alpina" when used 
to designate a plant of the Alps. His example has generally 
been followed until recently ; and this is in accordance with 
the custom of the English language. To the objection that it 
is contrary to the customs of the Latin language, our author 
replies at some length, substantially as follows. He finds that 
in the matter of orthography, etc., classical writers distinguish 
nine phases or periods of the Latin language, of which the 
most classical is the seventh period, that of Augustus ; and 
there is no foundation in classical Latin for either punctuation 
(the points distinguishing words, not phrases) or accentuation 
by signs, and that the distinction between capitals 
and small letters was made since the dark ages by scholars 
whom a purist of our day might tax with ignorance of the 
proper way of writing Latin ; that the object and result of all 
these and other innovations was greater clearness and precision 
; that the question is not at all one of ancient latinity, 
but of modern usages, both of the philologists and the naturalists 
; and these have happily modified classical Latin into a 
medium of greater precision and clearness and better adapted 
to the needs of science. 
Finally, we have a brief discussion of the question : " When 
an author has comprehended one genus in another without 
naming a species, can he be cited for the names of the species 
which implicitly result from this union ? " The answer he 
decisively gives is : " This would be neither right nor possible, 
nor practically convenient. To be correct, one should attribute 
to an author exactly what he has published. When it is 
said that the genus B should be united with the genus A, this 
is not saying that the species of the genus B should be called 
by such and such names in the genus A. To name them correctly 
it is necessary to examine them one by one. A glance 
at the Genera of Bentham and Hooker, or at the works of 
Baillon, will show how impossible it is to attribute the designation 
of the species to the authors who have changed the 
names of the genera, without an explanation under each 
species." This is illustrated by the supposed case of three 
genera combined into one, each of which has a species " lanceolata 
" ; by the case of a species " minor " transferred to a genus 
of which it may be the largest species : and by reference to the 
state of all large and many small genera, full of obscure, misunderstood, 
or debatable species, the arrangement and naming 
of which can be effected only by patient and prolonged study. 
When this work has not actually been done by the reformers 
of genera, it should be left to monographers and the editors of 
Floras. If, by article 45, " a species is not looked upon as 
named unless it has a generic name as well as a specific one," 
neither is it named unless a specific as well as a generic name 
is assigned to it. Besides the instances in which the old specific 
name is impossible under another genus, there are very 
many in which it would be improper or questionable, and in 
respect to which particular consideration is required. Between 
these cases and the plain ones in which implied naming could 
not go wrong, who is to draw the line ? Perhaps it might be 
drawn at monotypic new genera with old specific names. But 
how to do even this upon recognized principles is a problem. 
A fatal objection to the principle of names by implication 
is that all such names, if they are existent, must be indexed 
in the new " Nomenclator Botanicus " now in preparation. 
To transcribe under Senecio the specific names pertaining to 
all the genera which Bentham has referred to that already 
vast genus is no small matter, and a part of the work will 
prove superfluous if —as we suppose to be the case — some 
of these genera, such as Cacalia, ought to be maintained. But 
that is only the beginning. A more recent author, Baillon, 
has reduced the genera of Compositm nearly one half. For 
example, to Helenium he has referred Gaillardia, Actinella, 
Cephalophora, etc. ; to Tagetes he has referred Dysodia, Nicolettia, 
Hymenatherum, and others ; to Helianthus, a greater 
number of genera, most of them prolific in species. In all 
probability, most of these reductions will not be approved. 
Yet, if the principle of constructive naming is adopted, the 
"Nomenclator" must burden its columns with these hosts of 
inchoate specific names of Baillon, either as received names 
or as synonyms. It is plain that the principle referred to, 
besides its incongruity with the leading ideas of received 
nomenclature, breaks down with its own weight. There are, 
nevertheless, taking arguments in its favor, which need not 
here be recapitulated ; and the common system has its disadvantages 
and liability to abuse ; yet it appears to be the only 
workable system. As already intimated, the right assignment 
of specific names in reconstructed genera requires particular 
knowledge and careful investigation. And the botanist who 
reconstructs genera should himself adjust and state the specific 
names as far as he can. 
BALL'S FLORA OF THE PERUVIAN ANDES. 
The personal observations and the collections upon which 
this essay 1 was founded were made in April, 1882, in an 
excursion by railway from Lima up to Chicla, which although 
only seventy-five miles in distance, is at the elevation of 12,220 
English feet. Much to his surprise, Mr. Ball found that at 
this elevation he had not yet reached the alpine region, which 
really begins about 2000 feet higher. This is three or four 
thousand feet higher than Grisebach had placed it, on the 
authority of Tschudi and Humboldt; yet is only what we 
should expect, since the proper alpine vegetation of the Rocky 
Mountains in lat. 40° N. hardly descends below 10,000 feet, 
and the oscillations of temperature in the Peruvian Andes are 
small. 
Equally mistaken, Mr. Ball suspects, must be the common 
view that the flora of the tropical Andes is scanty in species 
as compared with high-mountain floras in general. He makes 
some comparisons from which he infers that the paucity is 
apparent rather than real, and may be attributed mainly to 
the paucity of collections in the Andes, since these vast regions 
have been visited at very few points and far between. 
About a quarter of the Andean phaenogams is of Compositm, 
which is double their ratio in North America, which 
again is greater than that of any other continent. The characteristic 
and the most abundant Andean Compositm are the 
Mutisiacem. Mr. Ball, referring to Bentham's indication of 
the complex affinities of this group, ventures " to believe that 
under Mutisiacem are included very many different lines of 
descent, but that among them there are some minor groups 
distinguished by very high relative antiquity." And in 
another connection he opines " that the arguments that have 
led some distinguished botanists to consider the great family 
1 Contributions to the Flora of the Peruvian Andes, with Remarks on the 
History and. Origin of the Andean Flora. By John Ball ; Journal Linnaean 
Society, xxii. London, 1885. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 
3 ser., xxxi. 231.) 
of Compositm as of comparatively recent origin to appear to 
me altogether inconclusive. When I consider the vast variety 
of forms which it includes, the degree in which some large 
groups are localized in different regions of the earth, while 
others, such as Senecio, have representatives iii every zone, I 
shrink from the conclusion that their origin can be, even in 
geological language, at all recent. It is, of course, not inconceivable 
that plants which we class together under the 
name Compositm may have come into existence by different 
lines of descent through gradual modification from different 
ancestral types. But when we consider the general agreement 
in the structure and arrangement of the essential organs, 
I think that the balance of probability inclines decidedly toward 
the belief in a community of origin of all the various 
existing forms. Be that as it may, we are, I think, justified 
in looking to the mountain region of South America as the 
original home of many large groups, such as the genus Baccharis, 
most of the Mutisiacem, and many genera of other 
tribes." 
As to these two suggestions, although it is practically convenient, 
and perhaps necessary, to bring all the Labiatiflorous 
Compositm under one tribe, as Bentham has done, it 
seems to us altogether probable that the existing forms are 
descended from different lines of ancestry. Indeed, by such 
a conception we can more naturally understand their diverse 
affinities. But as to the great order they belong to, if there 
is any large group in which the structure suggests community 
of origin, it is the Compositce. And we suppose that systematic 
botanists of large experience would entirely agree with 
Mr. Ball, that the wide differentiation and distribution of 
this vast order indicated its high antiquity. Our author has 
assigned some strong reasons for this opinion. The only 
argument to the contrary that we know of is an ideal one, 
based upon two suppositions : one, that Dicotyledons culminate 
in the Compositm and in such-like orders ; the other, 
that the highest ideal type of plants must be of the latest 
evolution. But, indeed, the vegetable commonwealth shows 
no tendency to culminate in any one group or set of groups ; 
and it is a questionable morphology which would promote the 
capitulum of a Thistle or a Dandelion to the head of the class. 
We remember an interesting lecture, in which, recognizing 
the dominant part which the northern hemisphere and its 
boreal lands, with their favorable configuration, have undoubtedly 
played in floral distribution, it was inferred that 
the role of the southern had always been comparatively insignificant. 
But a great deal may have happened in the 
austral regions before this boreal supremacy was established. 
Mr. Ball several years ago brought forward his doctrine of 
the very high antiquity of our actual temperate and alpine 
floras, of their coexistence in highly elevated regions of low 
latitudes even in early times. So now, applying his former 
conclusions to the southern hemisphere, and to " a period 
remote even in geological language," he notes that " the special 
generic types of the antarctic flora " " belong without 
exception to the great groups or natural orders which are 
now almost universally diffused throughout the world ; and 
the ancestral types from which they originated were probably 
carried to that region at a remote period, when the physical 
conditions of the earth's surface were widely different from 
those now prevailing." " Various considerations tend to the 
conclusion that the dispersal of the chief cosmopolitan genera 
of plants may have coincided with the period of the older 
secondary rocks ; and at that period physical agencies far 
transcending those of our experience prevailed throughout 
the earth. If the ancestors of the antarctic types of vegetation 
were then established in a south polar continental area, 
and were developed from them by gradual modification, I 
see no difficulty in believing that they may have maintained 
themselves through successive gradual changes of physical 
conditions within the same region, and even that some may 
still survive within the Antarctic Circle." 
Whether or not one accepts the idea of such high geological 
antiquity which Mr. Ball claims for what he calls Cosmopolitan 
types, we must wholly agree with him in his use of 
this name for them, in preference to that of the Scandinavian. 
The latter term was used by Hooker before the relation of 
BALL'S FLORA OF THE PERUVIAN ANDES. 387 
the present flora of our temperate zone to a former highnorthern 
vegetation was made clear, and before the types in 
question could " with more reason be referred to North 
America than to Scandinavia." Mr. Ball's remark that, as 
to many of them, " the balance of evidence points to an 
original home in the high mountains of lower latitudes " 
chimes in with his favorite and original doctrine. And this 
indeed seems likely to gain ground the more it is considered 
and applied, as he is applying it, to the explanation of actual 
distribution. 
The interesting problem is to discriminate, as well as may 
be, the two commingled elements of the northern temperate 
floras, one of arctic, the other of more endemic mountain 
origin. An interesting presentation, as concerns central 
Europe, is made in Heer's " Nival Flora of Switzerland," a 
posthumous work published by the Societe Helvetique des 
Sciences Naturelles, of which a summary is given in " Nature " 
for December 31, 1885. 
The following idea is extremely suggestive. "In a zoological 
as well as a botanical sense Brazil is one of the most 
distinct and separate regions of the earth. It is in large 
part a granitic region, from which vast masses of superincumbent 
strata have been denuded, and where the granite itself 
has undergone a great amount of decay and ablation. We 
there see the ruins of one of the greatest mountain masses of 
the earth, where a very ancient flora and fauna were developed, 
of which portions were able to migrate to a distance, 
while others have been modified to adapt themselves to the 
gradual changes of the environment. Many vegetable groups, 
which are but slightly represented in the higher region of 
the Andes, such, for instance, as the Melastoma.cem, probably 
had their origin in the mountains of ancient Brazil." 
We are now only beginning to reach some conception of 
the role which the Andes and their prolongation through 
Mexico have taken in determining the character of no small 
part of the North American flora. Following up some ideas 
which were touched upon in this Journal (vol. xxvii., Nov., 
1884, p. 340) and elsewhere, Mr. Ball writes : — 
" When we consider that, although subsidence has probably 
at various times separated the two portions of the continent, 
the highlands of Mexico and Central America have, 
in all probability, served during long periods as a bridge 
over which some portions of the mountain vegetation may 
have been transferred from north to south, and vice versa, 
we are led to feel surprise rather at the separations now existing 
than at the presence of many genera and of a few identical 
species in the flora of the Andes and that of the Rocky 
Mountains. It is true that I have reckoned as Andean 
genera and species many that extend northward as far as 
Mexico ; and it may well be that that region, so rich in varied 
forms of vegetation, is the original home of some that now 
appear to be more fully developed in the mountain ranges 
of western North America. Among the widespread American 
types we must note two natural orders whose original 
home may with some confidence be placed in the northwestern 
part of the continent. The Polemoniacem, of which 
about 140 species belong to that region, are represented in 
the Andes by five species of Gilia, one of Collonia, and by 
the endemic genus Cantua. They have sent to the Old 
World two or three species of Phlox in northern Asia [we 
believe only one, and that not far over the border], and a 
single emigrant which has reached Britain, — the Jacob's 
Ladder of old-fashioned gardens, — which maintains a struggling 
existence in several isolated spots in Europe. The 
other specially American family is that of the Hydrophyllacece, 
of which 12 genera are known in North America, but which 
is represented in the Andean chain by only four species of 
Phacelia." The Boasacem illustrate the opposite course of 
migration. 
A list of the plants which Mr. Ball collected in the upper 
valley of the Rimac in the Peruvian Andes, with various annotations 
and the characters of some new species, concludes 
the present interesting contribution to Andean Botany. We 
believe that a second paper upon the subject may be expected. 
Two or three comments upon individual plants of 
the list will bring our review to a close. 
BALL'S FLORA OF THE PERUVIAN ANDES. 389 
Erodium cicutarium. — Although Mr. Ball notes the wide 
diffusion of this Old. World species in South America, and 
that it attends the distribution of cattle, he seems at a loss to 
account for its presence in the Peruvian Andes at the height 
of 12,500 feet. He supposes that it has not shown the same 
readiness to establish itself in North America. This is true 
of the Atlantic but not of the Pacific side. In California and 
the adjacent districts the Alfilaria, as it is popularly called, 
has taken such full possession that we can hardly convince 
even the botanists that it is an introduced plant. The 
authors of the " Botany of California " speak of it as " more 
decidedly and widely at home throughout the interior than 
any other introduced plant, and, according to much testimony, 
it was as common throughout California early in the 
present century as now. ... It is a valuable and nutritious 
forage plant, reputed to impart an excellent flavor to milk 
and butter." At Santa Barbara and other parts of southern 
California it is used for lawns around dwellings, and it 
seems to be the only resort. It makes a passable substitute 
for grass so long as the rainy season lasts or irrigation is 
kept up. It must have been brought in with the earliest 
cattle, and have found on the Pacific coast a perfectly suitable 
climate. 
Caldasia of Lagasca, Mr. Ball shows us, must be restored 
as the name of the genus named Oreomyrrhis by Endlicher. 
Eelbunium, upon a general survey of the species, will in 
our opinion be found quite untenable as a genus. 
Phacelia circinata, which extends almost from one end to 
the other of the American continent, is said to be singularly 
constant, exhibiting no marked varieties. But we have in 
North America a remarkable diversity of forms, the extremes 
of which, by themselves, no botanist would refer to 
one species, although intermediate forms inextricably combine 
them.  
INDEX. 
Acanthacem in the Prodromus, 22. 
African, South, Plants, Harvey's, 36, 
Agassiz's Zoological Nomenclator, 41. 
Aldrovanda vesiculosa, insectivorous 
Banana, history of the cultivation of 
the, 344. 
Basin, the Great, character of, described, 
181. 
habits of, 208. 
Algol, fecundation of, 01. 
Alligator Pear, history of the, 342. 
Allium, North American, 281. 
Allium stellatum, 281. 
Allium vineale, 281. 
Amarantacem in the Prodromus, 27. 
Amelanchier, 195. 
Amole, 198. 
Ampelidem, Planchon's Monograph of, 
250. 
Flora, 104. 
Ampelopsis, characters of, discussed, 
251. 
Bentham and Hooker's Genera Plantarum, 
355. 
Ancestry of plants, 269. 
Bignonia capreolata, mode of growth 
of, 177. 
Andes, Peruvian, Ball's Flora of, 384. 
Anemophilous plants, 234. 
Bolandra, 282. 
Anthephora axilliflora, 113. 
Borrea ciliaris, black dots on (note), 
58. 
Apple, effect of foreign pollen on an, 
described (note), 189. 
Botanical descriptions in various languages 
contrasted, 302. 
Aquilegia flavescens, 185. 
Archaeology, plant, 269. 
Botanical riddles, 291. 
Arctic Plants, distribution of, 122. 
Asclepiadew in the Prodromus, 19. 
Aspirate, use of, in forming botanical 
Botanical -works, methods of publication 
of, discussed, 285. 
Botanists, characteristics of, 284. 
Botany, fossil, discussion of, 269. 
names, 262. 
Australia, Bentham's Flora of, 246. 
Authors' names, citation of, discussed, 
370. 
Botany, Henfrey 's, 72. 
Botany, Natural System of, 1. 
Botany, Watson's, of the 40th Parallel, 
180. 
Balanophorem, structure and affinities 
of, 94. 
Bottle-gourd, history of the, 330. 
Boussingault on Influence of Nitrates, 
100. 
Ball, John, and J. D. Hooker, Tour in 
Marocco, 255. 
Marocco, 255. Brazil, antiquity of the flora of, dis- 
Ball's Flora of the Peruvian Andes, cussed, 387. 
384. 
British Flora, Bentham's Hand-Book 
Cross-fertilization, methods of securing, 
described, 230. 
of, 104. 
Cross-fertilization, remarks on, 225. 
Cucurbita, Naudin on the genus, 83. 
Cucurbita maxima, 83, 332. 
British flora, statistics of, 105. 
Buchloii dactyloides, 113. 
Buffalo-grass, 112. 
Bulbochmte, nature of, 92. 
Cucurbita moschata, 83, 332. 
Cucurbita Pepo, 83, 332. 
Cucurbita verrucosa, 85. 
Calanthera dactyloides, PlS. 
Cassava-plant, origin of, discussed, 
Cucurbitacem, cross-breeding of, 86. 
Cucurbitacem, origin of cultivated 
320. 
Cell-formation, 54. 
species of, 329. 
Cucurbitacem, tendrils of, 174. 
Cell-markings, 53. 
Cell, physiological condition of, 55. 
Cell, the vegetable, Von Mold's, 51. 
Ceropegia, revolution of growing stem 
of, 102, 167. 
Chammlirium Carolinanum, 281. 
Cultivated Plants, De Candolle's Origin 
of, 311. 
Cultivated plants, improvement of, 
109. 
Cultivated plants, origin of, 69. 
Cupuliferm, present condition of, in 
Champlain, Les Voyages du Sieur de. 
84, 316 (note), 347. 
Circumnutation defined, 304. 
Europe, 137. 
Curtis' Trees of North Carolina, 115. 
Circumirutatory movements in plants 
explained, 306. 
Darwin's Cross and Self-Fertilization in 
the Vegetable Kingdom, 217. 
Citation of authors' names discussed. 
49, 370. 
Darwin's Different Forms of Flowers 
on Plants of the Same Species, 241. 
Clematis, mode of growth of stems of, 
168. 
Darwin's Insectivorous Plants, 206. 
Climates described, 272. 
Climbing, advantage of, in plants described, 
178. 
Darwin, Movements and Habits of 
Climbing Plants, 158. 
Darwin's Power of Movement in 
Plants, 304. 
Climbing Plants, Darwin's Movements 
and Habits of, 158. 
Decaisne's Monograph of the Genus 
Pyrus, 186. 
Climbing plants, irritability of growing 
stems of, 164. 
De Candolle's Prodromus, 15. 
Close-breeding, results of, 266. 
De Candolle's (A.) Ge"ographie Botanique, 
67. 
Close-fertilization, advantages of, discussed, 
229. 
De Candolle's (A.) Monograph of 
Smilacem, 249. 
Cobma scandens, mode of growth of, 
177. 
De Candolle's (A.) New Monographs, 
248. 
Color in flowers, purpose of, described, 
227. 
De Candolle's (A.) Nomenclature, 355. 
De Candolle's (A.) Origin of Cultivated 
Comandra, 29. 
Compositm in the Prodromus, 16. 
Compositm of the Peruvian Andes. 
Plants, 31.1. 
De Candolle's (A.) Phytography, 282. 
384. 
De Candolle (A.) on Species, 130. 
Connubial relations of plants, 241. 
Descriptions, abridged, 290. 
Descriptions, developed, 290. 
Descriptions of plants, discussed, 290. 
Dextrorse and sinistrorse, 297. 
Crescentia Cujete, note on derivation 
of the name of, 330. 
Cross-fertilization in the vegetable 
kingdom, 217. 
Diagnosis of plants discussed, 290. 
Cross-fertilization, benefits of, 245. 
Dianthera, 22. 
Dicentra, origin of name discussed, 
378. 
Diclytra, origin of name discussed, 
378. 
Dielytra, origin of name discussed, 
378. 
IHonma, insectivorous habits of, 207. 
Dioscorea sativa, origin of, discussed, 
322. 
Douglasia, 128. 
Drosera rotundifolia, insectivorous 
habits of, 207. 
Drosophyllum, insectivorous habits of, 
208. 
Echinocystis lobata, movements of, 174. 
Fmbryo, direction of, explained, 13. 
Emerson's Trees and Shrubs of Massa- 
chusetts, 204. 
Endlicher's Genera Plantarum, 33. 
Engelmann's Notes on the Genus 
Yucca, 196. 
Engelmann on the Buffalo-grass, 112. 
Epiontology defined, 131. 
Epping Forest, 253. 
Erodium cicutarium, distribution of, 
389. 
Euphorbiacem, Bentham on, 259. 
Fecundation, Process of, in the Vegetable 
Kingdom by Radlkof er, 91 . 
Fertility, degrees of, in crossed seed- 
lings of Ipomma purpurea, 221. 
Fertilization, self-, Henslow on, 263. 
Fertilization of flowers, relation of in- 
sects to, 235. 
Fertilization of Red Clover, 226. 
Flora of Australia, Bentham's, 246. 
Flora, British, Bentham's Hand-Book 
of, 104. 
Flora of Hongkong, Bentham's, 117. 
Flora, Indian, Hooker and Thomson's, 
02. 
Flora of the Peruvian Andes, Ball's, 
384. 
Flora, Tertiary, vegetation of, in southeast 
France, 145. 
Floras discussed, 292. 
Flowering and Flowerless Plants, 5. 
Flowerless and Flowering Plants, 5. 
Forms of flowers different on plant3 
of the same species, 242. 
Fossil botany, discussion on, 269. 
Fossil plants, nomenclature of, 380. 
Fruit, ripening of, 78. 
Fruits, nomenclature of, 78. 
Fucacem, fecundation of, 93. 
Fucus, note on Decaisne and Thuret's 
Memoir of, 59. 
Fungi, note on Leveille's paper on, 59. 
Gaura parvifora, 267. 
Genera, number known at different 
epochs, 357. 
Genera Plantarum, compared, 34. 
Genera Plantarum, Bentham and 
Hooker's, 355. 
Genera Plantarum, description of the 
different, 292. 
Genera Plantarum, Endlicher's, 33. 
Genera Plantarum, history of the different, 
355. 
Generic names, priority of, discussed, 
363 ; duplicate use of, 45. 
Gentiana Andrewsii, fertilization of, 
267. 
Geographie Botanique, A. Do Candolle's, 
67. 
Glaucus defined, 297. 
Granadillas, history of the cultivation 
of, 342. 
■5 
Gravity as a factor in plant-growth 
discussed, 309. 
Greenland, origin of the flora of, 123. 
Groups, methods of arranging, 289. 
Groups, natural arrangement of, 294. 
Gyneecium, use of the term discussed, 
297. 
Hamamelis Virginica, properties of 
79. 
Harvey's South African Plants, 36. 
Hastingsia, 281. 
Heer, appreciation of, 270. 
Helianthus argophyllus, experiments 
on growth of, 101. 
Helianthus giganteus, origin of Jerusalem 
Artichoke discussed, 315. 
Helianthus tuberosus, origin of discussed, 
314. 
Henfrey's Botany, 72. 
Henslow, George, Self -Fertilization of 
Plants, 263. 
Herbaria, their history, 304. 
Heredity and variability in plants, 
nature of, 212. 
Hesperoenide tenella, 90. 
Jleteromeles, 195. 
Ileterosmilax, 249. 
History of herbaria, 304. 
Jlollisteria, 282. 
Hongkong, Bentham's Flora of, 117. 
Hook-climbers, mode of growth of, 
171. 
Hooker on Balanophoreai, 94. 
Hooker on distribution of Arctic 
plants, 122. 
Hooker on Welwitschia, 151. 
Hooker and Ball's Tour in Marocco. 
255. 
Hooker and Thomson's Indian Flora, 
62. 
Hop, revolutions of growing stem of, 
160. 
Hops, native in North America, 328. 
llumulus Lupulus, native in North 
America, 328. 
Hybrids, characters of, 212. 
Hybridization of Lilies, 238. 
Hybridization, views upon, in Flora of 
India, 63. 
Ilydrophyllacem in the Prodromus, 20. 
Imbrication, quincuncial, 120. 
Improvement of cultivated plants, 109. 
Indian Flora, Hooker and Thomson's, 
62. 
Initials, capital, use of, discussed, 48. 
381. 
Insectivorous Plants, Darwin's, 206. 
Insects in relation to the fertilization 
of flowers, 235. 
Ipomcea purpurata, Darwin's experiments 
in fertilizing, 218. 
Japan, Siebold's Flora of, 37. 
Japanese flora contrasted with North 
American, 38. 
Jerusalem Artichoke, origin of, dis- 
cussed, 314 
Kidney Bean, history of the, 344. 
Labiatm in the Prodromus, 23. 
Lagenaria, history of, 330. 
Lanceolate, defined, 297. 
Language for botanical works discussed, 
286. 
Lasiostega humilis, 114. 
Latin, botanical, discussed, 286, 361. 
Leaf -climbers, mode of growth of, 168. 
Leaf, definition of the, 295. 
Lesquereux, appreciation of, 2jo. 
Lichens, Antheridia of (note), 58. 
Lichens, note on Tulasne's Memoir of, 
58. 
Lilac, terminal bud of, 75. 
Liliacem, North American, 278. 
it7iace<E,Watson's arrangement of, 278. 
Lilies, hybridization of, 238. 
Lillium Grayi, 281. 
Lillium Parhmanni, 238. 
Lima Bean, origin of, 351. 
Lindley's Natural System of Botany, 
1. 
Literary material, methods of collecting, 
discussed, 287. 
Longevity of trees, 82. 
Lophospermum scandens, mode of 
climbing, 170. 
Lycopersicum esculentum, history of 
the cultivation of, 341. 
Lygodium scandens, revolution of 
growing stems of, 163. 
Maianthemum bifolium, 281 . 
Mammoth, discussion on the origin of 
the, 142. 
Manihot utilissima, origin of, discussed, 
320. 
Manioc, origin of, discussed, 320. 
Marocco, Hooker and Ball's Tour in, 
255 ; early travels in, 255. 
Massachusetts, trees and shrubs of, 
204. 
Maurandia semperflorens, mode of 
growth of, 171. 
Meliacem, monograph of, 249. 
Mold's Vegetable Cell, 51. 
Monanthochloii, 114. 
Monographs of plants discussed, 290. 
Monstrosities, vegetable, 40. 
Moquin-Tandon's Vegetable Monstrosi- 
ties, 40. 
Musa, history of the cultivation of, 344. 
Names for garden-plants discussed, 
369. 
Names, formation of personal, for 
plants discussed, 368. 
Names, methods of abbreviation discussed, 
376. 
Names of natural orders, .11, 365. 
Names of organs, rules for choosing, 
290. 
Names of species in combined genera 
discussed, 49, 382. 
Names, permissible changes in, 377. 
Names, popular, of British plants dis- 
cussed, 106. 
Names, substantive specific, for plants 
discussed, 48, 368. 
Names, use of unpublished, 373. 
Natural orders, analogies of, 80. 
Natural orders, names of, 11. 
Natural System of Botany, 1. 
Naudin's Nature of Heredity and 
Variability in Plants, 212. 
Naudin on the genus Cucurbita, 83. 
Nitrates, influence of, in production of 
vegetable matter, 100. 
Nitrates, sources of, in soil, 103. 
Nolinem, 280. 
Nomenclator, Agassiz' s Zoological, 41. 
Nomenclature, A. De Candolle's, 358. 
Nomenclature, Bentham's views on, 
206. 
Nomenclature of fossil plants, 380. 
Nomenclature of organs, 294. 
North Carolina, trees of, 115. 
Nyctaginacem in the Prodromus, 28. 
Nyctotropism explained, 307. 
Oalcesia sessilifolia, 280. 
Oaks, A. De Candolle on distribution 
of the, 130. 
Oaks, history and origin traced, 136. 
Oaks, variations in, 132. 
Oca, history of cultivation of, 328. 
Odor in flowers, purpose of, described, 
227. 
(Edogonium, nature of, 01. 
Ordinal names, proper terminations of, 
discussed, 11, 365. 
Organography discussed, 293. 
Organs, nomenclature of, discussed, 
294. 
Organs of plants, nomenclature of, discussed, 
379. 
Organs, rules for choosing names of, 
296. 
Origanum vulgare, Darwin's experiments 
in crossing, 223. 
Orobanche, 21. 
Oxalis crenata, history of cultivation 
of, 328. 
■) 
Oxalis tuberosa, history of cultivation 
of, 328. 
■, 
Papilionaceous plants, fertilization of, 
267. 
Parkman, F., on the Hybridization of 
Lilies, 238. 
Parrya macrocarpa, 185. 
Parthenocissus, 252. 
Passiflora gracilis, movements of, 173. 
Passiflora, history of cultivation of, 
342. 
Passiflora incarnata, 343. 
Peach, origin of the, 329. 
Pears, history of the cultivation of, 193. 
Pears, method of producing large, 
described, 101. 
Pears, number of cultivated species of, 
188. 
Pears, races of, 192. 
Pears, stock for, 191. 
Peraphyllum, 195. 
Persea gratissima, history of, 342. 
Phacelia circinata, 389. 
Phaseolus lunatus, origin of, 351. 
Phaseolus vulgaris, history of, 344. 
Photinia, 195. 
Phyllotaxy, 76. 
Physiology of plants, 81. 
Phytogamy, 241. 
Phytography, A. De Candolle's, 282. 
Pickeringia, 15. 
Pilea pumila, 90. 
Pinguicula, glandular hairs of, 209. 
Pirns, 89, 329. 
Pistillum, use of the term discussed, 
297. 
Planchon's Monograph of Ampelidem, 
250. 
Plant Arclueology, 269. 
Plants, ancestry of, 269. 
Plants, anemophilous, 234. 
Plants, Climbing, Darwin's Movements 
and Habits of, 158. 
Plants, Cultivated, A. De Candolle's 
Origin of, 311 ; improvement of, 
109. 
Plants, connubial relations of, 241. 
Plants, Darwin's Power of Movement 
in, 304. 
Plants in Glazed Cases, Ward's Growth 
of, 59. 
Plants, history of their distribution, 70. 
Plants, Naudin on the Nature of Hered- 
ity and Variability in, 212. 
Plants, physiology of, 81 . 
Plants, relation of, to surrounding eon- 
ditions, 68. 
Plants, Self-fertilization of, by George 
Henslow, 263. 
Plants, self-sterile, 224. 
Poinsettia, adaptation to inseet-fertil- 
ization, 234. 
Pollen, direct action of, on ovary and 
ovules, 87 ; value of, discussed by 
Darwin, 228. 
Popular names of British plants dis- 
cussed, 106. 
Portulaca oleracea, introduction into 
North America, 326. 
Potato, origin of, discussed, 69 note, 
317. 
Primula Sinensis, glandular hairs of 
the leaves of, 209. 
Prirnulacem in the Prodromus, 18. 
Prodromus, De Candolle's, 15. 
Froserpina, Ruskin's, 100. 
Pruinosus defined, 207. 
Publication of botanical works dis- 
cussed, 285. 
Publicity of publication discussed, 
369. 
Purslain, introduction into North 
America, 326. 
Pyrularia, 28. 
Pyrus, characters of, 108. 
Pyrus, Decaisne's monograph of the 
genus, 186. 
Pyrus, division of the genus, 194. 
Pyrus, limitation of the genus, 189. 
Pyrus, morphology of the gynsecium 
of, 190. 
Pyrus, orthography of, 329. 
Quaternary climate described, 275. 
Quercus Ilex, 139. 
Quercus Robur, 13S, 139. 
Quincuncial imbrication, 120. 
Races, fixity of new, in cultivation, 110. 
Radicle, character of -the, 121. 
Radicle of the embryo, true character 
of, 74. 
Radlkofer's Process of Fecundation in 
the Vegetable Kingdom, 91. 
Ranunculus alismmfolius, 184. 
Ranunculus fascicularis, 184. 
Ranunculus orthorhynchus, 184. 
Red Clover, fertilization of, 226. 
liestiacem, monograph of, 248. 
Rhamnacem, stamens of, 76. 
Rhipogonum, 249. 
Riddles, botanical, 291. 
Root, mode of penetration into the 
soil, 306. 
Root-hairs, 75. 
Root-tip, functions of, discussed, 307. 
Bosa setigera, mode of growth of, 171. 
Ruskin's Proserpina, 199. 
Salsolacem in the Prodromus, 26. 
Santalacece in the Prodromus, 28. 
Saporta's Monde des Plantes avant 
I'Apparition de l'Homme, 269. 
Sarracenia, history of discoveries re- 
lating to, 210. 
Saxifrages, glandular hairs of the 
leaves of, 209. 
Schmnolirion album, 280. 
Seeds, reproduction by, 58. 
Self-fecundation discussed, 267. 
Self fertilization in the vegetable kingdom, 
217, 263. 
] Self -sterile plants, 224. 
] Sequoia, history of, 277. 
Shortia glacifolia, 16. 
Siebold's Flora of Japan, 37. 
Sinistrorse and dextrorse, 297. 
Sisymbium, IS6. 
Smilacem, A. De Candolle's Monograph 
of, 249. 
Smilacem, distribution of, 250. 
Smilacina, nomenclature of, 261. 
Smilax, 249. 
Soil, soluble matters in, 103. 
Solarium tuberosum, origin of, discussed, 
317. 
Species, A. De Candolle's definition of, 
149 ; Linnaeus' definition of, 1 48. 
Species, origin of, Naudin's view's on, 
216. 
Species, variation and distribution of, 
130. 
Species, various views on the, 147. 
Species, views on the derivation of, 
140. 
Specimens, incomplete, difficulties of 
describing, 292. 
Sphmroplea, nature of, 92. 
Statistics of the British flora, 105. 
Stem, the initial, defined, 310. 
Stems of climbing plants, revolutions 
of, 159. 
Streptanthus, 185. 
Style in botanical writing discussed, 
302. 
Sullivantia Ohioensis, 282. 
Sweet Potato, origin of, discussed, 317. 
Tendril-bearing plants, origin of, 150. 
Tendril-climbers, mode of growth of, 
172. 
Tendrils, movements of, described, l72. 
Tendrils of Cucurbitacem, 175. 
Terms, contradictory use of, 296. 
Terms, multiplication of, discussed, 
296. 
Thalictrum Fendleri, 184. 
Thomson and Hooker's Indian Flora, 
62. 
Tomato, history of the cultivation of 
the, 341. 
Tree-culture, possibilities of, in England, 
254. 
Trees, longevity of, 82. 
Trees of North Carolina, 115. 
Trees and Shrubs of Massachusetts, 
Emerson's, 204. 
Urticacem, geographical distribution 
of, 89 ; relationships of, 88. 
Urticacem, Weddell's Monograph of, 
87. 
Utricularim, North American in the 
Prodromus, 18. 
Uvularia, 281. 
Variability and heredity in plants, nature 
of, 212. 
Variation of species discussed, 214. 
Varieties, importance of describing, 
293. 
Varieties, method of treating, 288. 
Varieties, their relations to species, 
287. 
Vegetable kingdom, cross and selffertilization 
in, 217. 
Vegetable kingdom, Radlkofer's process 
of fecundation in, 91. 
Vegetable monstrosities, 40. 
Vegetable woi'ld, history of, 274. 
Vilmorin on the improvement of cultivated 
plants, 109. 
Virginia Creeper, tendrils of, 176. 
Vitis f characters of, discussed, 251. 
Wallace, A. R. , on Epping Forest, 253. 
Ward's Growth of Plants in Glazed 
Cases, 50. 
Wardian cases, growth of plants in, 
50. 
Watson's Botany of the 40th Parallel, 
180. 
Watson on North American Liliaccm, 
278. 
Weddell's Monograph of Urticacem, 87. 
Weed, Henslow's definition of a, 268. 
Weeds, fertilization of, 268. 
Weldenia, 281. 
Welwitschia, J. D. Hooker on, 151. 
Yam, origin of the, discussed, 322. 
Yucca, Engelmann's notes on, 196. 
Yucca, anthesis of, 197. 
Yucca, nature of the fruit of, 108.              
SCIENTIFIC PAPERS 
OF 
ASA GRAY 
SELECTED BY 
CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT 
VOL. 11. 
ESSAYS; BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 
1841-1886 
S^^^i^H 
BOSTON AND NEW YORK 
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY 
At tie Otars'ibe PttW, €amhri&oE 
iSSg 
f MAR 28 ' 
c — —~ 
Copyright, 1889, 
By CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT. 
.48 n'</ta reserved. 
UNIVERSITY! 
\ UN 2? H»6B J 
TAe Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., U. S. A. 
Electrotyped anil Printed by H. 0. Houghton & Company, 
CONTENTS. 
ESSAYS. 
PAGE 
European Herbaria \ 
Notes op a Botanical Excursion to the Mountains of North 
Carolina 22 
The Longevity of Tbees 71 
The Floba op Japan ]25 
Sequoia and its History 142 
Do Varieties Wear Out or tend to Wear Out .... 174 
and its Terminology 131 
A Pilgrimage to Torreya 189 
Notes on the History op Helianthus Tuberosus .... 197 
Forest Geography and Archaeology 204 
The Pertinacity and Predominance op Weeds .... 234 
The Flora op North America 243 
Gender op Names op Varieties 257 
Characteristics of the North American Flora .... 260 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 
Brown and Humboldt 283 
Augustin-Pybamus De Candolle ....... 289 
Benjamin D. Greene . , 310 
Charles Wilkes Short 312 
Francis Boott 315 
William Jackson Hooker 321 
John Lindley 333 
William Henry Harvey 337 
Henry P. Sartwell 343 
Chester Dewey 345 
Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward 349 
Moses Ashley Curtis 351 
Hugo Von Mohl 354 
Robert Wight 350 
Frederick Welwitsch 358 
359 
John Torbey . ' 
William Starling Sullivant • 370 
377 
Jeffries Wyman . 
Daniel Hanbuby 
Alexander Braun 40 ° 
Charles Pickering 40 " 
Eli as Magnus Fries 411 
Jacob Bigelow . 
417 
John Carey . 
Thomas Potts James • • 419 
491 
John Amory Lowell 
405 
Charles Darwin *"" 
437 
Joseph Decaisne 
George Engelmann 
447 
Oswald Heer . 
George Bentham 
465 
Augustus Fendlek 
Charles Wright 
r* w n„„ , . 475 
47 jj 
George W. Clinton ' 
479 
Edmond Boissier . • • • • ■ ' 
Johannes August Christian Rceper 
T ' 483 
Louis Agassiz 
491 
Edward Tuckerman 
ESSAYS. 
EUROPEAN HERBARIA. 
The vegetable productions of North America, in common 
with those of most other parts of the world, have generally 
been first described by European botanists, either from the 
collections of travelers, or from specimens communicated by 
residents of the country, who, induced by an enlightened curiosity, 
the love of flowers, or in some instances by no inconsiderable 
scientific acquirements, have thus sought to contribute, 
according to their opportunities, to the promotion of botanical 
knowledge. From the increase in the number of known 
plants, it very frequently happens that the brief descriptions, 
and even the figures, of older authors are found quite insufficient 
for the satisfactory determination of the particular species 
they had in view ; and hence it becomes necessary to refer 
to the herbaria where the original specimens were preserved. 
In this respect, the collections of the early authors possess an 
importance far exceeding their intrinsic value, since they are 
seldom large, and the specimens often imperfect. 
With the introduction of the Linnaean nomenclature, a rule 
absolutely essential to the perpetuation of its advantages was 
also established, namely, that the name under which a genus 
or species is first published shall be retained, except in certain 
cases of obvious and paramount necessity. An accurate determination 
of the Linnaean species is therefore of the first 
importance ; and this, in numerous instances, is only attained 
with certainty by the inspection of the herbaria of Linnasus 
and those authors upon whose descriptive phrases or figures 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, xl. 1. (1841.) 
he established many of his species. Our brief notices will 
therefore naturally commence with the herbarium of the immortal 
Linnaeus, the father of that system of nomenclature to 
which botany, no less than natural history in general, is so 
greatly indebted. 
This collection, it is well known, after the death of the 
younger Linnaeus, found its way to England, from whence it 
is not probable that it will ever be removed. The late Sir 
James Edward Smith, then a young medical student, and a 
botanist of much promise, was one morning informed by Sir 
Joseph Banks that the heirs of the younger Linnaeus had just 
offered him the herbarium with the other collections and the 
library of the father, for the sum of 1000 guineas. Sir Joseph 
Banks not being disposed to make the purchase, recommended 
it to Mr. Smith ; the latter, it appears, immediately decided to 
risk the expectation of a moderate independence, and to secure, 
if possible, these treasures for himself and his country ; and 
before the day closed had actually written to Upsal, desiring 
a full catalogue of the collection, and offering to become the 
purchaser at the price fixed, in case it should answer his expectations 
1 
1 The next day Mr. Smith wrote as follows to his father, informing him 
of the step he had taken and entreating his assistance : — 
"Honored Sir: Yovi may have heard that the young Linnaeus is 
lately dead : his father's collections and library, and his own, are now to 
be sold ; and the whole consists of an immense hortus siccus, with duplicates, 
insects, shells, corals, materia medica, fossils, a very fine library, 
all the unpublished manuscripts, in short, everything they were possessed 
of relating to natural history and physic ; the whole has just been offered 
to Sir Joseph Banks for 1000 guineas, and he has declined buying it. The 
offer was made to him by my friend Dr. Engelhart, at the desire of a Dr. 
Acrel of Upsal, who has charge of the collection. Now, lam so ambitious 
as to wish to possess this treasure, with a view to settle as a physician in 
London, and read lectures on natural history. Sir Joseph Banks and all 
my friends to whom I have entrusted my intention, approve of it highly. 
I have written to Dr. Acrel, to whom Dr. Engelhart has recommended 
me, for particulars and the refusal, telling him if it was what I expected, 
I would give him a very good price for it. I hope, my dear sir, you and my 
good mother will look on this scheme in as favorable a light as my friends 
here do. There is no time to be lost, for the affair is now talked of in all 
companies, and a number of people wish to be purchasers. The Empress 
His success, as soon appeared, was entirely owing to his 
promptitude, for other and very pressing applications were 
almost immediately made for the collection, but the upright 
Lr. Acrel, having given Mr. Smith the refusal, declined to entertain 
any other proposals while this negotiation was pending. 
The purchase was finally made for 900 guineas, excluding the 
separate herbarium of the younger Linnaeus, collected before 
his father's death, and said to contain nothing that did not 
exist in the original herbarium ; this was assigned to Baron 
Alstrcemer, in satisfaction of a small debt. The ship which 
conveyed these treasures to London had scarcely sailed, when 
the king of Sweden, who had been absent in France, returned 
home and dispatched, it is said, an armed vessel in pursuit. 
This story, though mentioned in the "Memoir and Correspondence 
of Sir J. E. Smith," and generally received, has, we 
believe, been recently controverted. However, the king and 
the men of science in Sweden were greatly offended, as indeed 
they had reason to be, at the conduct of the executors, in 
allowing these collections to leave the country ; but the disgrace 
should perhaps fall more justly upon the Swedish government 
itself and the University of Upsal, which derived its 
reputation almost entirely from the name of Linnaeus. It 
was, however, fortunate for science that they were transferred 
from such a remote situation to the commercial metropolis of 
the world, where they are certainly more generally accessible. 
The late Professor Schultes, in a very amusing journal of a 
botanical visit to England in the year 1824, laments indeed 
of Russia is said to have thoughts of it. The manuscripts, letters, etc., 
must be invaluable, and there is, no doubt, a complete collection of all the 
inaugural dissertations which have been published at Upsal, a small part 
of which has been published under the title of "Amaenitates Academicse," 
a very celebrated and scarce work. All these dissertations were written 
by Linnseus, and must be of prodigious value. In short, the more I think 
°f this affair the more sanguine I am, and earnestly hope for your concurrence. 
I wish I could have one half hour's conversation with you ; but 
that is impossible." (Correspondence of Sir James Edward Smith, edited 
by Lady Smith, vol. i. p. 93.) 
The appeal to his father was not in vain ; and, did our limits allow, we 
should be glad to copy, from the work cited above, the entire correspond- 
ence upon this subject. 
that they have fallen to the lot of the " toto disjunctos orbe 
Britannos " ; yet a journey even from Landshut to London 
may perhaps be more readily performed than to Upsal. 
After the death of Sir James Edward Smith the herbarium 
and the other collections, and library of Linnaeus, as well as 
his own, were purchased by the Linnaean Society. The herbarium 
still occupies the cases which contained it at Upsal, and 
is scrupulously preserved in its original state, except that, for 
more effectual protection from the black penetrating dust of 
London, it is divided into parcels of convenient size, which 
are closely wrapped in covers of strong paper lined with muslin. 
The genera and covers are numbered to correspond with 
a complete manuscript catalogue, and the collection, which is 
by no means large in comparison with modern herbaria, may 
be consulted with great facility. 
In the negotiation with Smith, Dr. Acrel stated the number 
of species as 8000, which probably is not too low an estimate. 
The specimens, which are mostly small, but in excellent 
preservation, are attached to half-sheets of very ordinary 
paper, of the foolscap size J (which is now considered too 
small), and those of each genus covered by a double sheet, in 
the ordinary manner. The names are usually written upon 
the sheet itself, with a mark or an abbreviation to indicate the 
source from which the specimen was derived. Thus those 
from the Upsal garden are marked PP. PP., those given by 
Kalm, K., those received from Gronovius, Gron., etc. The 
labels are all in the handwriting of Linnaeus himself, except 
a few later ones by the son, and occasional notes by Smith, 
which are readily distinguished, and indeed are usually designated 
by his initials. By far the greater part of the North 
American plants which are found in the Linnaean herbarium 
were received from Kalm, or raised from seeds collected by 
1 Upon this subject Dr. Acrel, giving an account of the Linniean collections, 
thus writes to Smith: "Ut vero vir illustrissimus, dum vixit, 
nihil ad ostentationem habuit, omnia vero sua in usum accommodata ; ita 
etiam in hoc herbario, quod per XL. annos sedulo collegit, frustra qusesiveris 
papyri insignia ornamenta, margines inauratas, et cet. quse ostentationis 
gratia in omnibus fere herbariis nunc vulgaria sunt." 
him. Under the patronage of the Swedish government, this 
enterprising pupil of Linnaeus remained three years in this 
country, traveling throughout New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, 
and Lower Canada ; hence his plants are almost 
exclusively those of the northern States. 1 
Governor Golden, to whom Kalm brought letters of introduction 
from Linnaeus, was then well known as a botanist by 
his correspondence with Peter Collinson and Gronovius, and 
also by his account of the plants growing around Coldenham, 
New York, which was sent to the latter, who transmitted it to 
Linnaeus for publication in the " Acta Upsalensia." At an 
early period he attempted a direct correspondence with Linnaeus, 
but the ship by which his specimens and notes were 
sent was plundered by pirates ; 2 and in a letter sent by 
Kalm, on the return of the latter to Sweden, he informs Linnaeus 
that this traveler had been such an industrious collector 
as to leave him little hopes of being himself farther useful. 
It is not probable therefore that Linnaeus received any plants 
from Colden, nor does his herbarium afford any such indication 
3 
1 " Ex his Kalmium, natural eximium scrutatorem, itinere suo per Pennsylvaniam, 
Novum Eboracum, et Cauadum, regiones America ad septentrionem 
vergentes, trium annorum decursu dextre confecto, in patriam 
Hide nuper reducem lseti reeipimus : iugentem enim ab istis terras reportavit 
thesaurum non conchyliorum solum, insectorum, et amphibiorum sed 
°erbarum etiam diversi generis ac usus, quas, tam siccas quam vivas, allatls 
etiam seminibus eorum recentibus et incorruptis, adduxit." (Linn. 
Awsen.. Acad., vol. iii. p. 4.) 
See Letter of Linn*us to Haller, September 24, 1746. 
The Holosteum succulentum of Linnaeus (Alsine foliis ellipticis carnosis 
°t Colden) is, however, marked in Linnseus's own copy of the " Species 
lantarum" with the sign employed to designate the species he at that 
tune possessed ; but no corresponding specimen is to be found in his her, 
num. This plant has long been a puzzle to American botanists ; but it 
is clear from Colden' s description that Dr. Torrey has correctly referred 
't, in his "Flora of the Northern and Middle States " (1824), to Stellaria 
media, the common Chickweed. Governor Colden's daughter seems fully 
o have deserved the praise which Collinson, Ellis, and others have bestowed 
upon her. The latter, in a letter to Linna?us (April, 1758), says : 
Air. Colden of New York has sent Dr. Fothergill a new plant, described 
J his daughter. It is called Fibraurea, gold-thread. It is a small creep- 
From Gronovius, Linnaeus had received a very small number 
of Clayton's plants, previous to the publication of the 
" Species Plantarum " ; but most of the species of the " Flora 
Virginica " were adopted or referred to other plants on the 
authority of the descriptions alone. 
Linnaeus had another American correspondent in Dr. John 
Mitchell, 1 who lived several years in Virginia, where he collected 
extensively ; but the ship in which he returned to 
England having been taken by pirates, his own collections, 
as well as those of Governor Colden, were mostly destroyed. 
Linnaeus, however, had previously received a few specimens, 
as, for instance, those on which Proserpinaca, Polypremum, 
Galax, and some other genera were founded. 
There were two other American botanists of this period, 
from whom Linnaeus derived either directly or indirectly 
much information respecting the plants of this country, 
namely, John Bartram and Dr. Alexander Garden of Charleston, 
South Carolina. 
ing plant, growing on bogs ; the roots are used in a decoction by the country 
people for sore mouths and sore throats. The root and leaves are 
very bitter, etc. I shall send you the characters as near as I can translate 
them." Then follows Miss Colden's detailed generic character, prepared 
in a manner which would not be discreditable to a botanist of the present 
day. It is a pity that Linnseus did not adopt the genus, with Miss Colden's 
name, which is better than Salisbury's Coptis. " This young lady 
merits your esteem and does honor to your method. She has drawn and 
described four hundred plants in your system : she uses only English 
terms. Her father has a plant called after him Coldenia ; suppose you 
should call this (alluding to a now genus of which he added the characters) 
Coldenella, or any other name which might distinguish her among 
your genera." (Ellis, Letter to Linnieus.) 
1 To him the pretty Mitchella repens was dedicated. Dr. Mitchell had 
sent to Collinson, perhaps as early as the year 1740, a paper in which 
thirty new genera of Virginian plants were proposed. This Collinson 
sent to Trew at Nuremberg, who published it in the " Ephemerides Acad. 
Naturae Cnriosorum " for 1748; but in the mean time most of the 
genera had been already published, with other names, by Linnaeus or Gronovius. 
Among Mitchell's new genera was one which he called Chamsedaphne 
: this Linnaeus referred to Lonicera, but the elder (Bernard) Jussieu, 
in a letter dated February 19, 1751, having shown him that it was 
very distinct both from Lonicera and Linnsea, and in faet belonged to a 
different natural order, he afterwards named it Mitchella. 
The former collected seeds and living plants for Peter Collinson 
during more than twenty years, and even at that early 
day extended his laborious researches from the frontiers of 
Canada to southern Florida and the Mississippi. All his 
collections were sent to his patron Collinson, 1 until the death 
1 Mr. Collinson kept up a correspondence with all the lovers of plants 
in this country, among whom were Governor Colden, Bartram, Mitchell, 
Clayton, and Dr. Garden, by whose means he procured the introduction 
of great numbers of North American plants into the English gardens. 
" Your system," he writes Linnaeus, " I can tell you, obtains much in 
America. Mr. Clayton and Dr. Colden at Albany, on Hudson's River, in 
New York, are complete professors, as is Dr. Mitchell at Urbana, on 
Rappahannock River in Virginia. It is he that has made many and great 
discoveries in the vegetable world." "I am glad you have the correspondence 
of Dr. Colden and Mr. Bartram. They are both very indefatigable, 
ingenious men. Your system is much admired in North America," 
Again, "I have but lately heard from Mr. Colden. He is well, 
but what is marvellous, his daughter is perhaps the first lady that has so 
perfectly studied your system. She deserves to be celebrated." "In 
the second volume of ' Edinburg Essays ' is published a Latin botanic dissertation 
by Miss Colden ; perhaps the only lady that makes a profession 
of the Linnaean system, of which you maybe proud." From all this, botany 
appears to have flourished in the North American colonies. But Dr. 
Garden about this time writes thus to his friend Ellis : "Ever since I 
have been in Carolina, I have never been able to set my eye upon one 
who had barely a regard for botany. Indeed, I have often wondered 
how there should be one place abounding with so many marks of the divine 
wisdom and power, and not one rational eye to contemplate them ; 
or that there should be a country abounding with almost every sort of 
plant, and almost every species of the animal kind, and yet that it 
should not have pleased God to raise up one botanist. Strange, indeed, 
that the creature should be so rare ! " But to return to Collinson, the 
most amusing portion of whose correspondence consists of his letters to 
Einnffius shortly after the publication of the "Species Plantarum," in 
which (with all kindness and sincerity) he reproves the great Swedish 
naturalist for his innovations, employing the same arguments which a 
strenuous Liimsean might be supposed to advance against a botanist of 
these latter days.^ "I have had the pleasure," Collinson writes, "of 
reading your ' Species Plantarum,' a very useful and laborious work. 
-"Ut, my dear friend, we that admire you are much concerned that you 
should perplex the delightful science of botany with changing names that 
nave been well received, and adding new names quite unknown to us. 
■Ihus, botany, which was a pleasant study and attainable by most men, is 
n °w become, by alterations and new names, the study of a man's life, and 
of that amiable and simple-hearted man, in 1768 ; and by 
him many seeds, living plants, and interesting observations 
were communicated to Linnaeus, but few, if any, dried specimens. 
Dr. Garden, who was a native of Scotland, resided in 
Charleston, South Carolina, from about 1745 to the commencement 
of the American Revolution, devoting all the time 
he could redeem from an extensive medical practice to the 
zealous pursuit of botany and zoology. His chief correspondent 
was Ellis at London, but through Ellis he commenced a 
correspondence with Linnaeus, and to both he sent manuscript 
descriptions of new plants and animals with many excellent 
critical observations. None of his specimens addressed to the 
latter reached their destination, the ships by which they were 
sent having been intercepted by French cruisers ; and Linnaeus 
complained that he was often unable to make out many of Dr. 
Garden's genera for want of the plants themselves. Ellis was 
sometimes more fortunate, but as he seems usually to have contented 
himself with the transmission of the descriptions alone, 
we find no authentic specimens from Garden in the Linnaean 
herbarium. 
We have now probably mentioned all the North American 
correspondents of Linnaaus ; for Dr. Kuhn, who appears only 
to have brought him living specimens of the plant which bears 
his name, and Catesby, who shortly before his death sent a 
few living plants which his friend Lawson had collected in 
Carolina, can scarcely be reckoned among the number. 1 
none now but real professors can pretend to attain it. As I love you I 
tell you our sentiments." (Letter of April 20, 1754.) " You have begun 
by your ' Species Plantarum ' ; but if you will be forever making new 
names, and altering good and old ones, for such hard names that convey 
no idea of the plant, it will be impossible to attain to a perfect knowledge 
in the science of botany." (Letter of April 10, 1755 : from Smith's Selection 
of the Correspondence of Linnaeus, etc.) 
1 In a letter to Haller, dated Leyden, January 23, 1738, Linnajus 
writes : " You would scarcely believe how many of the vegetable productions 
of Virginia are the same as our European ones. There are Alps in 
the country of New York, for the snow remains all summer long on the 
mountains there. I am now giving instructions to a medical student 
here, who is a native of that country, and will return thither in the course 
of a year, that he may visit those mountains, and let me know whether 
The Linnaean Society also possesses the proper herbarium 
of its founder and first president, Sir James E. Smith, which 
is a beautiful collection and in perfect preservation. The 
specimens are attached to fine and strong paper, after the 
method now common in England. In North American botany, 
the chief contributors are Menzies, for the plants of 
California and the Northwest coast ; and Muhlenberg, Bigelow, 
Torrey, and Boott, for those of the United States. Here 
also we find the Cryptogamic collections of Acharius, containing 
the authentic specimens described in his works on 
the Lichens, and the magnificent East Indian herbarium of 
Wallich, presented some years since by the East India Company. 

The collections preserved in the British Museum are 
scarcely inferior in importance to the Linnaean herbarium 
itself, in aiding the determination of the species of Linnaeus 
and other early authors. Here we meet with the authentic 
herbarium of the " Hortus Cliffortianus," one of the earliest 
works of Linnaeus, which comprises some plants which are 
not to be found in his own proper herbarium. Here also is 
the herbarium of Plunkenet, which consists of a great number 
of small specimens crowded, without apparent order, upon 
the pages of a dozen large folio volumes. With due attention, 
the originals of many figures in the " Almagestum " and 
" Amaltheum Botanicum," etc., may be recognized, and many 
Linnaean species thereby authenticated. The herbarium of 
Sloane, also, is not without interest to the North American 
botanist, since many plants described in the " Voyage to 
Jamaica," etc., and the " Catalogue of the Plants of Jamaica," 
were united by Linnaeus, in almost every instance incorrectly, 
with species peculiar to the United States and Canada. But 
still more important is the herbarium of Clayton, from whose 
notes and specimens Gronovius edited the " Flora Virginica." 
J Many Linnaean species are founded on the plants 
the same alpine plants are found there as in Europe." Who can this 
American student have been ? Kulm did not visit Linnaeus until more 
than fifteen years after the date of this letter. 
" Flora Virginica, exhibens plantas quas J. Clayton in Virgin' col- 
here described for which this herbarium is alone authentic ; 
for Linnaeus, as we have already remarked, possessed very 
few of Clayton's plants. The collection is nearly complete, 
but the specimens were not well prepared, and are not therefore 
always in perfect preservation. A collection of Catesby's 
plants exists also in the British Museum, but probably 
the larger portion remains at Oxford. There is besides, 
among the separate collections, a small but very interesting 
parcel selected by the elder Bartram, from his collection 
made in Georgia and Florida almost a century ago, and presented 
to Queen Charlotte, with a letter of touching simplicity. 
At the time this fasciculus was prepared, nearly all the 
plants it comprised were undescribed, and many were of entirely 
new genera ; several, indeed, have only been published 
very recently, and a few are not yet recorded as natives of 
North America. Among the latter we may mention Petiveria 
alliacea and PKiminea Americana, which last has again 
recently been collected in the same region. This small parcel 
contains the Elliottia, Muhl., Polypteris, Nutt., Baldwinia, 
Nutt., Macranthera, Torr., Glottidium, Mayaca, Chaptalia, 
Befaria, Eriogonum tomentosum, Polygonum polygamum, 
Vent., Gardoquia Plooheri, Benth., Satureia (Pycnothymus) 
rigida, Cliftonia, Hypericum aureum, Galactia Elliottii, 
PPrameria lanceolata, Torr., Waldsteinia ( Comaropsis) lobata, 
Torr. & Gr., the Dolichos ? multiflorus, Torr. & Gr., 
the Chapmannia, Torr. & Gr., Psoralea Lupinellus, and others 
of almost equal interest or rarity, which it is much to be regretted 
were not long ago made known from Bartram's discoveries. 

The herbarium of Sir Joseph Banks, now in the British 
Museum, is probably the oldest one prepared in the manner 
commonly adopted in England, of which, therefore, it may 
serve as a specimen. The plants are glued fast to half-sheets 
of very thick and firm white paper of excellent quality (similar 
to that employed for merchants' ledgers, etc.), all care- 
legit." Ludg. Bat. Bvo, 1743. Ed. 2, 4to, 1762. The first edition is cited 
in the " Species Plantarum " of Linnaeus ; the second, again, quotes the 
specific phrases of Linnaeus. 
fully cut to the same size, which is usually 16 \ inches by 10|, 
and the name of the species is written on the lower righthand 
corner. All the species of a genus if they are few in 
number, or any convenient subdivision of a larger genus, are 
enclosed in a whole sheet of the same quality, and labelled at 
the lower left-hand corner. These parcels, properly arranged, 
are preserved in cases or closets, with folding-doors made to 
shut as closely as possible, being laid horizontally into compartments 
just wide enough to receive them, and of any convenient 
depth. In the Banksian herbarium, the shelves are 
also made to draw out like a case of drawers. This method 
is unrivalled for elegance, and the facility with which the 
specimens may be found and inspected, which to a working 
botanist with a large collection is a matter of the greatest 
consequence. The only objection is the expense, which becomes 
very considerable when paper worth at least ten dollars 
per ream is employed for the purpose, which is the case 
with the principal herbaria in England ; but a cheaper paper, 
if it be only sufficiently thick and firm, will answer nearly as 
well. The Banksian herbarium contains authentic specimens 
of nearly all the plants of Aiton's " Hortus Kewensis," in 
which many North American species were early established. 
It is hardly proper indeed, that either the elder or younger 
Aiton should be quoted for these species, since the first edition 
was prepared by Solander, and the second revised by 
Dryander, as to vol. 1 and 2, and the remainder by Mr. 
Brown. Many American plants from the Physic garden at 
Chelsea, named by Miller, are here preserved, as also from 
the gardens of Collinson, Dr. Fothergill (who was Bartram's 
correspondent after Collinson's death), Dr. Pitcairne, etc. 
There are likewise many contributions of indigenous plants of 
the United States, from Bartram, Dr. Mitchell, Dr. Garden, 
Eraser, Marshall, and other early cultivators of botany in this 
country. The herbarium also comprises many plants from 
Labrador and Newfoundland, a portion of which were collected 
by Sir Joseph Banks himself ; and in the plants of 
the northern and arctic regions it is enriched by the collections 
of Barry, Ross, and Dr. Richardson. Two sets of 
plants collected by the venerable Menzies in Vancouver's voyage, 
are preserved at the British Museum, the one incorporated 
with the Banksian herbarium, the other forming a separate 
collection. Those of this country are of the Northwest 
Coast, the mouth of the Oregon River, and from California. 
Many of Pursh's species were described from specimens preserved 
in this herbarium, especially the Oregon plants of 
Menzies and those of Bartram and others from the more 
southern United States, which Pursh had never visited, although 
he often adds the mark v. v. (vidi vivam) to species 
which are only to be met with south of Virginia. 
The herbarium of Walter still remains in the possession of 
the Fraser family, and in the same condition as when consulted 
by Pursh. It is a small collection, occupying a single 
large volume. The specimens, which are commonly mere 
fragments, often serve to identify the species of the " Flora 
Caroliniana," although they are not always labelled in accordance 
with that work. 
The collections of Pursh, which served as the basis of his 
" Flora Americae Septentrionalis," are in the possession of Mr. 
Lambert, and form a part of his immense herbarium. These, 
with a few specimens brought by Lewis and Clark from Oregon 
and the Rocky Mountains, a set of Nuttall's collections 
on the Missouri, and also of Bradbury's so far as they are extant, 
with a small number from Fraser, Lyon, etc., compose 
the most important portion of this herbarium, so far as North 
American botany is concerned. There is also a small Canadian 
collection made by Pursh subsequently to the publication 
of his Flora, a considerable number of Menzies's plants, and 
other minor contributions. To the general botanist, probably 
the fine herbarium of Pallas, and the splendid collection of 
Ruiz and Pavon (both acquired by Mr. Lambert at a great 
expense) are of the highest interest ; and they are by no 
means unimportant in their relations to North American botany, 
since the former comprises several species from the Northwest 
Coast and numerous allied Siberian forms, while our 
California plants require in some instances to be compared 
with the Chilian and Peruvian plants of the latter. 
Besides the herbaria already mentioned, there are two 
others in London of more recent formation, which possess the 
highest interest as well to the general as to the American 
botanist, namely that of Professor Lindley, and of Mr. Bentham. 
Both comprise very complete sets of the plants collected 
by Douglas in Oregon, California, and the Rocky 
Mountains, as well as those raised from seeds or bulbs, which 
he transmitted to England, of which a large portion have from 
time to time been published by these authors. Mr. Bentham's 
herbarium is probably the richest and most authentic collection 
in the world for Labiatai, and is perhaps nearly unrivalled 
for Leguminosce, Scrophularinece, and the other tribes 
to which he has devoted especial attention ; it is also particularly 
full and authentic in European plants. Professor Lindley's 
herbarium, which is very complete in every department, 
is wholly unrivalled in Orchidaceous plants. The genus-covers 
are made of strong and smooth hardware paper, the names 
being written on a slip of white paper pasted on the lower corner. 
This is an excellent plan, as covers of white paper, in 
the herbarium of an active botanist, are apt to be soiled by 
frequent use. The paper employed by Dr. Lindley is 8A 
mches in length and 11A inches wide, which, as he has himself 
remarked, is rather larger than is necessary, and much too 
expensive for general use. 
The herbarium of Sir William J. Hooker, at Glasgow, is 
not only the largest and most valuable collection in the world, 
in the possession of a private individual, but it also comprises 
the richest collection of North American plants in Europe. 
Were we find nearly complete sets of the plants collected in 
the arctic voyages of discovery, the overland journeys of 
franklin to the polar sea, the collections of Drummoud and 
Uouglas in the Rocky Mountains, Oregon, and California, as 
w ell as those of Professor Scouler, Mr. Tolmie, Dr. Gairdner, 
and numerous officers of the Hudson's Bay Company, 
om almost every part of the vast territory embraced in their 
operations from one side of the continent to the other. By an 
active and prolonged correspondence with nearly all the bot- 
a nists and lovers of plants in the United States and Canada, 
as well as by the collections of travelers, this herbarium is 
rendered unusually rich in the botany of this country ; while 
Drummond's Texan collections, and many contributions from 
Mr. Nuttall and others, very fully represent the flora of our 
southern and western confines. That these valuable materials 
have not been buried, or suffered to accumulate to no 
purpose or advantage to science, the pages of the "Flora 
Boreali- Americana," the "Botanical Magazine," the "Botanical 
Miscellany," the " Journal of Botany," the " Icones Plantairum," 
and other works of this industrious botanist, abundantly 
testify ; and no single herbarium will afford the student 
of North American botany such extensive aid as that of Sir 
William Hooker. 
The herbarium of Dr. Arnott of Arlary, although more 
especially rich and authentic in East Indian plants, is also 
interesting to the North American botanist, as well for the 
plants of the " Botany of Captain Beechy's Voyage," etc., 
published by Hooker and himself, as the collections of Drummond 
and others, all of which have been carefully studied by 
this sagacious botanist. 
The most important botanical collection in Paris, and, indeed, 
perhaps the largest in the world, is that of the Royal 
Museum at the Jardin des Plantes or Jardin du Roi. We 
cannot now devote even a passing notice to the garden and 
magnificent new conservatories of this noble institution, much 
less to the menagerie and celebrated museum of zoology and 
anatomy, of the cabinet of mineralogy, geology, and fossil remains, 
which, newly arranged in a building recently erected 
for its reception, has just been thrown open to the public. 
The botanical collections occupy a portion of this new building. 
A large room on the first floor, handsomely fitted up 
with glass cases, contains the cabinet of fruits, seeds, sections 
of stems, and curious examples of vegetable structure from 
every part of the known world. Among them we find an interesting 
suite of specimens of the wood, and another comprising 
the fruits, or nuts, of nearly all the trees of this country 
; both collected and prepared by the younger Michaux. 
The herbaria now occupy a large room or hall, immediately 
over the former, perhaps eighty feet long and thirty wide above 
the galleries, and very conveniently lighted from the roof. 
Beneath the galleries are four or five small rooms on each 
side, lighted from the exterior, used as cabinets for study and 
for separate herbaria, and above them the same number of 
smaller rooms or closets, occupied by duplicate or unarranged 
collections. The cases which contain the herbaria occupy the 
walls of the large hall and of the side rooms. Their plan may 
serve as a specimen of that generally adopted in France. The 
shelves are divided into compartments in the usual manner : 
out instead of doors the cabinet is closed by a curtain of thick 
and coarse brown linen, kept extended by a heavy bar attached 
to the bottom, which is counterpoised by concealed 
Weights, and the curtain is raised or dropped by a pulley. 
■raper of very ordinary quality is generally used, and the 
specimens are attached, either to half sheets or to double 
sheets, by slips of gummed paper, or by pins, or sometimes 
the specimen itself is glued to the paper. Genera or other 
divisions are separated by interposed sheets, having the name 
Written on a projecting slip. 
According to the excellent plan adopted in the arrangement 
01 these collections, which is due to Desfontaines, three kinds 
°* herbaria have been instituted, namely : 1. The general heraruun. 
2. The herbaria of particular works or celebrated 
uthors, which are kept distinct, the duplicates alone being 
attributed in the general collection. 3. Separate herbaria of 
<- liferent countries, which are composed of the duplicates taken 
rom the general herbarium. To these, new accessions from 
uerent countries are added, which from time to time are 
ssorted and examined, and those required for the general herarnim 
are removed to that collection. The ancient herbarium 
aulant forms the basis of the general collection ; the specimens, 
which are all labelled by his own hand, are in excellent 
I es ervation, and among them plants derived from Cornuti or 
. !• Surrasin may occasionally be met with. This collection, 
to many times its original extent, by the plants of 
Dombey, Poiteau, Leschenault, etc., and by the 
P icates from the special herbaria, probably contains at this 
time thirty or forty thousand species. Of the separate herbaria, 
the most interesting to us is that made in this country 
by the elder Michaux, from whose specimens and notes lie 
learned Richard prepared the " Flora Boreali-Americana." 
Michaux himself, although an excellent and industrious 
collector and observer, was by no means qualified for authorship 
; and it is to L. C. Richard that the sagacious observations, 
and the elegant, terse, and highly characteristic specific 
phrases of this work are entirely due. There is also the very 
complete Newfoundland collection of La Pylaie, comprising 
about 300 species, and a set of Berlandier's Texan and Mexican 
plants, as well as numerous herbaria less directly connected 
with North American botany, which we have not room to 
enumerate. Here, however, we do not find the herbaria of 
several authors which we should have expected. That of 
Lamarck, for instance, is in the possession of Professor Rceper 
at Rostock, on the shores of the Baltic ; that of Poiret belongs 
to Moquin-Tandon of Toulouse; that of Bose, to Professor 
Moretti of Pavia ; and the proper herbarium of the late Desfontaines, 
which however still remains at Paris, now forms a 
part of the very large and valuable collection of Mr. Webb. 
The herbarium of Mr. Webb, although of recent establishment, 
is only second to that of Baron Delessert ; the two being far 
the largest private collections in France, and comprising not 
only many older herbaria, but also, as far as possible, full sets 
of the plants of recent collectors. The former contains many 
of Michaux's plants (derived from the herbarium of Desfontaines), 
a North American collection, sent by Nuttall to the 
late Mr. Mercier of Geneva, a full set of Drummond's collections 
in the United States and Texas, etc. The latter also 
comprises many plants of Michaux, derived from Ventenat's 
herbarium, complete sets of Drummond's collections, etc. 
But a more important, because original and perhaps complete, 
set of the plants of Michaux is found in the herbarium of the 
late Richard, now in possession of his son, Professor Achille 
Richard, which even contains a few species which do not exist 
in the herbarium at the Royal Museum. The herbarium 
of the celebrated Jussieu, a fine collection, which is scrupu- 
iously preserved in its original state, by his worthy son and 
successor, Professor Adrien Jussieu, comprises many North 
American plants of the older collectors, of which several are 
authentic for species of Lamarck, Poiret, Cassini, etc. 
The herbarium of De Candolle at Geneva, accumulated 
throughout the long and active career of this justly celebrated 
botanist, and enriched by a great number of correspondents, 
ls surpassed by few others in size, and by none in importance. 
in order that it may remain as authentic as possible for his 
Published works, especially the " Prodromus," no subsequent 
accessions to families already published are admitted into the 
general herbarium, but these are arranged in a separate collection. 
The proper herbarium, therefore, accurately exhibits 
tne materials employed in the preparation of the " Prodromus, 
at least so far as these were in Professor De Candolle's 
ow n possession. As almost twenty years have elapsed since 
t>e commencement of this herculean undertaking, the authentic 
herbarium is of course much less rich in the earlier than 
n the later orders. The Compositce, to which seven years of 
nremitted labor have been devoted, form themselves an herarium 
of no inconsiderable size. It is unnecessary to enumerate 
the contributors to this collection (which indeed would 
orm an extended list), since the author, at least in later 
v oh mies of the " Prodromus," carefully indicates, as fully as 
e work permits, the sources whence his materials have been 
erived. The paper employed is of an ordinary kind, somewhat 
smaller than the English size, perhaps fifteen inches by 
en ; and the specimens are attached to half sheets by loops 
r slips of paper fastened by pins so that they may readily be 
ached, if necessary, for particular examination. Several 
pecimens from different sources or localities, or exhibiting 
e (Liferent varieties of a species, are retained when practi_ 
e ; and each species has a separate cover, with a label 
xed to the corner, containing the name and a reference 
0 the volume and page of the " Prodromus " where it is deed. 
The limits of genera, sections, tribes, etc., are marked 
7 interposed sheets, with the name written on projecting 
Ihe parcels which occupy each compartment of the 
well-filled shelves are protected by pieces of binder's board, 
and secured by a cord, which is the more necessary as the 
doors are not closed by doors or curtains. 
The royal Bavarian herbarium at Munich is chiefly valuable 
for its Brazilian plants, with which it has been enriched 
by the laborious and learned Martius. The North American 
botanist will, however, be interested in the herbarium of 
Schreber, which is here preserved and comprises the authentic 
specimens described or figured in his work on the grasses, the 
American species mostly communicated by Muhlenberg. The 
Gramince of this and the general herbarium have been revised 
by Nees von Esenbeck, and still later by Trinius. It was 
here that the latter, who for many years had devoted himself 
to the exclusive study of this tribe of plants, and had nearly 
finished the examination of the chief herbaria of the continent, 
preparatory to the publication of a new Agrostographia, 
was suddenly struck with a paralysis, which has probably 
brought his scientific labors to a close. 
The imperial herbarium at Vienna, under the superintendence 
of the accomplished Endlicher, assisted by Dr. Fenzl, 
is rapidly becoming one of the most valuable and extensive 
collections in Europe. The various herbaria of which it is 
composed have recently been incorporated into one, which is 
prepared nearly after the English method. It, however, possesses 
few North American plants, except a collection made 
by Enslin (a collector sent to this country by Prince Lichtenstein, 
from whom Pursh obtained many specimens from 
the southern States), and some recent contributions by 
Hooker, etc. There is also an imperfect set of plants collected 
by Haenke (a portion of which are from Oregon and California), 
so far as they are yet published in the " Reliquae Haenkeanae 
" of Presl, in whose custody, as curator of the Bohemian 
museum at Prague, the original collection remains. 
The herbarium of the late Professor Sprengle still remains 
in the possession of his son, Dr. Anthony Sprengle, at Halle, 
but is offered for sale. It comprises many North American 
plants communicated by Muhlenberg and Torrey. The herbarium 
of Schkuhr was bequeathed to the university of Wit- 
tenberg, and at the union of this university with that of Halle 
Was transferred to the latter, where it remains under the care 
of Professor von Schlechtendal. It contains a large portion 
of the Carices described and figured in Schkuhr's work, and 
is therefore interesting to the lovers of that large and difficult 
genus. The American specimens were mostly derived from 
Willdenow, who obtained the greater portion from Muhlenberg. 

-Che royal Prussian herbarium is deposited at Schbneberg 
(a little village in the environs of Berlin), opposite the royal 
botanic garden, and in the garden of the Horticultural Society. 
It occupies a very convenient building erected for its 
reception, and is under the superintendence of Dr. Klotzsch, 
a very zealous and promising botanist. It comprises three 
separate herbaria, namely, the general herbarium, the herbarium 
of Willdenow, and the Brazilian herbarium of Sello. 
-Tbe principal contributions of the plants of this country to 
the general herbarium, garden specimens excepted, consist of 
the collections of the late Mr. Beyrich, who died in western 
Arkansas, while accompanying Colonel Dodge's dragoon expedition, 
and a collection of the plants of Missouri and Arkansas 
by Dr. Engelmann, now of St. Louis ; to which a fine selection 
of North American plants, recently presented by Sir 
'Villiam Hooker, has been added. The botanical collections 
Blade by Chamisso, who accompanied Romanzoff in his voyage 
ound the world, also enrich this herbarium; many are from 
he coast of Russian America and from California ; and they 
have mostly been published conjointly by the late Von 
Chamisso and Professor Schlechtendal in the " Linnaea " 
edited by the latter. 
Lne late Professor Willdenow enjoyed for many years the 
correspondence of Muhlenberg, from whom he received the 
greater part of his North American specimens, a considerable 
portion of which are authentic for the North American plants 
01 Ins edition of the " Species Plantarum." In addition to these 
6 find m his herbarium many of Michaux's plants commuicated 
by Desfontaines, several from the German collector 
n n, and perhaps all the American species described by 
Willdenow from the Berlin garden. It also comprises a portion 
of the herbarium of Pallas, the Siberian plants of Stephen, 
and a tolerable set of Humboldt's plants. This herbarium is 
in good preservation, and is kept in perfect order and extreme 
neatness. As left by Willdenow, the specimens were loose in 
the covers, into which additional specimens had sometimes 
been thrown and the labels often mixed, so that much caution 
is requisite to ascertain which are really authentic for the 
Willdenovian species. To prevent farther sources of error, 
and to secure the collection from injury, it was carefully revised 
by Professor Schlechtendal while under his management, 
and the specimens attached by slips of paper to single 
sheets, and all those that Willdenow had left under one cover, 
as the same species, are enclosed in a double sheet of neat blue 
paper. These covers are numbered continuously throughout 
the herbarium, and the individual sheets or specimens in each 
are also numbered, so that any plant may be referred to by 
quoting the number of the cover and that of the sheet to 
which it is attached. The arrangement of the herbarium is 
unchanged, and it precisely accords with this author's edition 
of the " Species Plantarum." Like the general herbarium, it 
is kept in neat portfolios, the back of which consists of three 
pieces of broad tape, which, passing through slits near each 
edge of the covers, are tied in front : by this arrangement 
their thickness may be varied at pleasure, which, though of 
no consequence in a stationary herbarium, is a great convenience 
in a growing collection. The portfolios are placed vertically 
on shelves protected by glass doors, and the contents of 
each are marked on a slip of paper fastened to the back. 
The herbaria occupy a suite of small rooms distinct from the 
working rooms, which are kept perfectly free from dust. 
Another important herbarium at Berlin is that of Professor 
Kunth, which is scarcely inferior in extent to the royal 
collection at Schoneberg, but it is not rich or authentic in the 
plants of this country. It comprises the most extensive and 
authentic set of Humboldt's plants, and a considerable number 
of Michaux's which were received from the younger Richard. 
As the new " Enumeratio Plantarum " of this industrious 
botanist proceeds, this herbarium will become still more important. 

For a detailed account of the Russian botanical collections 
and collectors, we may refer to a historical sketch of the 
progress of botany in Russia, etc., by Mr. Bongard, the superintendent 
of the Imperial Academy's herbarium at St. Petersburg, 
published in the "Recueil des Actes" of this institution 
for 1834. An English translation of this memoir is published 
in the first volume of Hooker's " Companion to the Botanical 
Magazine." 
NOTES OF A BOTANICAL EXCURSION TO THE 
MOUNTAINS OF NORTH CAROLINA. 
The peculiar interest you 2 have long taken in North American 
botany, and your most important labors in its elucidation, 
indicate the propriety of addressing to yourself the 
following remarks, relating, for the most part, to the hasty 
collections made by Mr. John Carey, Mr. James Constable, 
and myself, in a recent excursion to the higher mountains of 
North Carolina. Before entering upon our own itinerary, it 
may be well to notice very briefly the travels of those who 
have preceded us in these comparatively unfrequented ' regions. 
The history of the botany of the Alleghany Mountains 
would be at once interesting and on many accounts 
useful to the cultivators of our science in this country ; but 
with my present inadequate means, I can only offer a slight 
contribution towards that object. 
So far as I can ascertain, the younger (William) Bartram 
was the first botanist who visited the southern portion of the 
Alleghany Mountains. Under the auspices of Dr. Fothergill, 
to whom his collections were principally sent, and with 
whom his then surviving father had previously corresponded, 
Mr. Bartram left Philadelphia in 1773, and after traveling 
in Florida and the lower part of Georgia for three years, he 
made a transient visit to the Cherokee country, in the spring 
of 1776. In this journey he ascended the Seneca or Keowee 
River, one of the principal sources of the Savannah, and 
crossing the mountains which divide its waters from those of 
the Tennessee, continued his travels along the course of the 
latter to the borders of the present State of Tennessee. 
Finding that his researches could not safely be extended in 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, xlii. 1. (1842.) 
2 Sir W. J- Hooker. 
BOTANICAL EXCURSION TO NORTH CAROLINA. 23 
this direction, after exploring some of the higher mountains 
in the neighborhood, he retraced his steps to the Savannah 
River, proceeding thence through Georgia and Alabama to 
Mobile. His well-known and very interesting volume of 
travels l contains numerous observations upon the botany of 
these reo'ions, with occasional popular descriptions, and in a 
few cases Latin characters of some remarkable plants ; as, 
for example, the Rhododendron punctatum (which he calls 
R. ferruqineum), Stuartia pentagyna (under the name of 
S. montana), Azalea calendulacea (which he terms A. flammed), 
Trautvetteria, which he took for a new species of 
Hydrastris, Magnolia auriculata, etc. He also notices the 
remarkable intermixture of the vegetation of the north and 
south, which occurs in this portion of the mountains where 
Halesia, Styrax, Stuartia, and Gelseminum (although the latter 
" is killed by a very slight frost in the open air in Pennsylvania") 
are seen flourishing by the side of Birches, 
Maples, and Firs of Canada. 
I should next mention the name of Andre Michaux, who 
at an early period, amid difficulties and privations of which 
few can now form an adequate conception, explored our country 
from Hudson's Bay to Florida, and westward to the Mississippi, 
more extensively than any subsequent botanist. A 
few of his plants have not yet been rediscovered, and a considerable 
number remain among the rarest and least known 
species of the United States ; it may therefore be useful to 
give a particular account of his peregrinations, especially 
through the mountain region which he so diligently explored, 
and in which he made such important discoveries. For this 
purpose I am fortunately supplied with sufficient materials, 
having had the opportunity of consulting the original journals 
of Michaux, presented by his son to the American Philosophical 
Society. I am indebted for this privilege to the kindness 
of John Vaughn, Esq., the secretary of the society, who 
directed my attention to these manuscripts, and permitted me 
i 
1 "Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia, East and 
West Florida, the Cherokee Country," etc. By William Bartram. Phila- 
delphia, 1791. 
to extract freely whatever I deemed useful and interesting. 
The first fasciculus of the diary is wanting; but we learn 
from a chance record, as well as from published sources, 1 
that he embarked at L'Orient on the 29th of September, 
1785, and arrived in New York on the 13th of November. 
The private journal from which the following information is 
derived commences in April, 1787 ; prior to which date he 
had established two gardens, or nurseries, to receive his collections 
of living plants until they could be conveniently 
transported to France : one in New Jersey, near the city of 
New York ; the other about ten miles from Charleston, 
South Carolina. Into the latter it appears he introduced 
some exotic trees, which he thought suitable to the climate ; 
and the younger Michaux, who visited this garden several 
years afterwards, mentions two Ginkgos (Salisburia adiantiflolicP), 
which in seven years had attained an elevation of 
thirty feet ; also some fine specimens of Sterculia platanifolia, 
and a large number of young plants of Mimosa Julibrissin, 
propagated from a tree which his father had brought 
from Europe. From this stock, probably, the latter has been 
disseminated throughout the southern States, and is beginning 
to be naturalized in many places. 
I have no means of ascertaining what portions of the country 
Michaux had visited previously to April, 1787, when he 
set out from Charleston on his first journey to the Alleghany 
Mountains, by way of Savannah, ascending the river of 
that name to its sources in the Cherokee country, and following 
very nearly the route taken by Bartram eleven years before 
2 He reached the sources of the Keowee River on the 
i See Michaux, "Flora Boreali- Americana " ; Introduction. See also 
"A Sketch of the Progress of Botany in Western America," by Dr. 
Short, in the " Transylvania Journal of Medicine," No. 35 ; and in 
Hooker's " Journal of Botany " for November, 1840. lam informed that 
an interesting notice of Michaux is contained in the Bth volume of the 
" Dictionnaire Encyclopedique de Botanique " (under the head of Voyageurs) 
; a work which unfortunately I am not able at this moment to 
consult. 
2 In this journey he was accompanied by his son, who shortly afterwards 
returned to Europe. Before they reached Augusta, their horses 
14th of June, and was conducted by the Indians across the 
mountains to the head of the Tugaloo (the other principal 
branch of the Savannah), and thence to the waters of the 
Tennessee. After suffering much inconvenience from unfavorable 
weather and the want of food, he returned to the 
Indian village of Seneca by way of Cane Creek, descended 
along the Savannah to Augusta, and arrived at Charleston on 
the Ist of July. His notes in this as well as in subsequent 
journeys to the mountains often contain remarks upon the 
more interesting plants he discovered ; and in some cases 
their localities are so carefully specified that they might still 
be sought with confidence. On the 16th of July he embarked 
for Philadelphia, which he reached on the 27th ; and, after 
visiting Mr. Bartram, traveled to New York, arriving at the 
garden he had established in New Jersey about the Ist of 
August. Returning by water to Charleston the same month, 
he remained in that vicinity until February, 1788, when he 
embarked for St. Augustine, and was busily occupied, during 
this spring, in exploring east Florida. His journal mentions 
several sub-tropical plants, now well known to be indigenous 
to Florida, but which are not noticed in his Flora : such as 
the Mangrove Guilandina Bonduc, Sophora occidentalis, 
two or three Ferns, and especially the Orange. 1 Leaving 
Florida at the beginning of June, he returned by land to 
Savannah and Charleston, where he was confined by sickness 
the remainder of the summer. Late in the autumn, however, 
he made a second excursion to the sources of the Savannah, 
chiefly to obtain the roots and seeds of the remarkable plants 
he had previously discovered. He pursued the same route as 
before, except that he ascended the Tugaloo, instead of the 
were stolen, a misfortune which, it appears from Michaux's remarks, was 
of no uncommon occurrence in those days ; and they were obliged to pursue 
their journey to that place on foot. On the way he discovered " a 
shrubby Rumex," which he terms Lapathum occidentale ; doubtless the 
Polygonella parvifolia of his Flora, and also the Polygonum polygamum of 
Ventenat. 
1 "Les hois etoient remplis d'oranges aigres," etc. Michaux, MSS. 
See also Bartram's " Travels " ; and Torrey & Gray, " Flora of North 
America," i. p. 222. 
Seneca or Keowee River, crossing over to the latter ; and, 
climbing the higher mountains about its sources in the inclement 
month of December, when they were mostly covered with 
snow, he at length found some trees of Magnolia cordata, to 
obtain which was the principal object of this arduous journey. 
Retracing his steps, he reached Charleston at the end of 
December, with a large collection of living trees, roots, and 
seeds. The remainder of the winter Michaux passed in the 
Bahama Islands, returning to Charleston in the month of 
May. Early in June he set out upon a journey to a different 
portion of the mountains of North Carolina, by way of Camden, 
Charlotte (the county seat of Mecklenburg), and Morganton, 
reaching the higher mountains at " Turkey Cove, 
thirty miles from Burke Court House " (probably the head 
of Turkey Creek, a tributary of the Catawba), on the 15th of 
June. From this place he made an excursion to the Black 
Mountain, in what is now Yancey County, and afterwards to 
the Yellow Mountain, which Michaux at that time considered 
to be the highest mountain in the United States. If the 
Roan be included in the latter appellation, as I believe it 
often has been, this opinion is not far from the truth ; since 
the Black Mountain alone exceeds it, according to Professor 
Mitchell's recent measurements. Descending this elevated 
range on the Tennessee side, and traveling for the most part 
through an unbroken wilderness, near the end of June he 
reached the Block House on the Holston, famous in the annails 
of border warfare. Several persons had been killed by 
the Indians during the preceding week, and general alarm 
prevailing, Michaux abandoned his intention of penetrating 
into Kentucky, and resolved to botanize for a time in the 
mountains of Virginia. He accordingly entered that State, 
and arrived on the Ist of July at " Washington Court House, 
premiere ville dans la Virginie que Ton trouve sur la cote 
occidentale des montagnes, en sortant de la Carolinie Septentrionale." 
To this he adds the following note : " Premiere 
ville, si Ton peut nommer ville une Bourgade compose'e de 
douze maisons (log-houses). Dans cette ville on ne mange 
que de pain de Mays. II n'y a viande fraiche, ni cidre, mais 
BOTANICAL EXCURSION TO NORTH CAROLINA. 27 
seulement du mauvais Rum." Abingdon, the county seat of 
Washington County, is now a flourishing town ; but Michaux's 
remarks are still applicable to more than one premiere 
ville in this region. From this place he continued his 
course along the valley of Virginia throughout its whole extent, 
crossing New River, the Roanoke, and passing by Natural 
Bridge, Lexington, Staunton, and Winchester ; thence by 
way of Frederick in Maryland, and Lancaster, Pennsylvania, 
he arrived at Philadelphia on the 21st of July, and at New 
York on the 30th. In August and September he returned to 
Charleston by way of Baltimore, Alexandria, Richmond, and 
Wilmington, North Carolina. In November he revisited the 
mountains explored early in the preceding summer, passing 
through Charlotte, Lincolnton, and Morganton, to his former 
headquarters at Turkey Cove ; from whence he visited the 
north branch of Catawba (North Cove, between Linville 
Mountain and the Blue Ridge ?), the Black Mountain, Toe 
River, etc. ; and returned to Charleston in December, with 
two thousand five hundred young trees, shrubs, and other 
plants. From January until April, 1791, this indefatigable 
botanist remained in the vicinity of Charleston; but his 
memoranda for the remainder of that year are unfortunately 
wanting. The earliest succeeding date I have been able to 
find is March 22, 1792, when he sold the " Jardin du Roi " at 
Charleston, and going shortly afterwards by water to Philadelphia, 
he botanized in New Jersey and around New York 
until the close of May. In the beginning of June he visited 
Milford, Connecticut, to procure information from a Mr. 
Peter Pound, who had traveled far in the northwest; and 
at New Haven took passage in a sloop for Albany, where he 
arrived on the 14th of June (having botanized on the way 
at West Point, Poughkeepsie, etc.); on the 18th he was 
at Saratoga; on the 20th he embarked at Skenesborough 
(Whitehall), botanized more or less on the shores of Lake 
Champlain, reaching Montreal on the 30th of June, and Quebec 
on the 16th of July. 1 The remainder of this season was 
1 Among the plants collected in this journey, he particularly mentions 
having found Aconitum uncinatum near Quebec ; but in the Flora no 
devoted to an examination of the region between Quebec and 
Hudson's Bay, the botany of which, as is well known, he was 
the first to investigate. His journal comprises a full and 
very interesting account of the physical geography and vegetation 
of that inclement district. 
Leaving Quebec in October, and returning by the same 
route, we find our persevering traveler at Philadelphia early 
in December. It appears that he now meditated a most formidable 
journey, and made the following proposition to the 
American Philosophical Society : " Propose a plusieurs membres 
de la Societe" Philosophique les avantages pour les Etats- 
Ums d'avoir des informations geographiques des pays a l'ouest 
de Mississippi, et demande qu'ils aient a endosser mes traites 
pour la somrne de £3600, si je suis dispose a voyager aux 
sources du Missouri, et meme rechercher les rivieres qui 
coulent vers l'ocean Pacifique. Ma proposition ayant 6te 
accepte, j'ai donne a Mr. Jefferson, Secretaire d'Etat, les 
conditions auxquels je suis dispose a entreprendre ce voyage. 
. . . J'offre de communiquer toutes les connoisances et informations 
geographiques a, la Societe Philosophique ; et je reserve 
a mon profit toutes les connoisances en histoire naturelle 
que j'acquirerai dans ce voyage." Remaining in Philadelphia 
and its vicinity until the following summer, he set out for 
Kentucky in July, 1793, with the object of exploring the 
western States (which no botanist had yet visited), and also 
of conferring with General Clarke (at Mr. Jefferson's request) 
on the subject of his contemplated journey to the 
Rocky Mountains. He crossed the Alleghanies in Pennsylvania, 
descended the Ohio to Louisville, Kentucky, traversed 
that State and western Virginia to Abingdon, and again traveled 
through the valley of Virginia to Winchester, Harper's 
Ferry, etc., arriving at Philadelphia on the 12th of December 
of the same year. Conferences respecting his projected expedition 
were now renewed, in which Mr. Genet, the envoy from 
the French republic, took prominent part ; but here the mat- 
other locality is given than the high mountains of North Carolina. Major 
Le Conte found it several years ago in the southwestern part of New 
York, and Mr. Lapham has recently detected it in Wisconsin. 
ter seems to have dropped, since no further reference is made 
to the subject in the journal ; and Michaux left Philadelphia 
in February, 1794, on another tour to the southern States. 
In July of that year he again visited the mountains of North 
Carolina, traveling from Charleston to Turkey Cove by his 
old route. On this occasion he ascended the Linville Mountain, 
and the Other mountains in the neighborhood ; but having 
" differe a cause du manque des provisions," he left his 
old quarters (at Ainsworth's), crossed the Blue Ridge, and established 
himself at Crab Orchard on Doe River. From this 
place he revisited the Black Mountain, and, accompanied by 
his new o- u ide, Davenport, explored the Yellow Mountain, the 
Roan, and finally the Grandfather, the summit of which he 
attained on the 30th of August. 1 Returning to the house of 
his guide, he visited Table Mountain on the sth of September, 
and proceeded (by way of Morganton, Lincolnton, Salisbury, 
and Fayetteville, North Carolina) to Charleston, where 
he passed the winter. 
On the nineteenth day of April, 1795, our indefatigable 
traveler again set out, reached the Santee River at Nelson's 
Ferry, ascended the Wateree, or Catawba, to Flat Rock Creek, 
visited Flat Rock, 2 crossed Hanging-Rock Creek, and ascended 
1 His earlier journals are full of expressions of loyalty to the king under 
whose patronage his travels were undertaken ; but now transformed 
into a republican : " Monte" au sommct de la plus haute montagne de 
toute l'Amerique Septentrionale, chaute' avee mon compagnon-guide 
l'liymne de Marseillois, et criC, ' Vive la Liberte et la llepublique Francaise.'" 
If this enthusiasm were called forth by mere elevation, he should 
have chanted his pagans on the Black Mountain and the Roan, both of 
which are higher than the Grandfather. 
2 I believe this is the only instance in which the name of Flat Bock 
occurs in Michaux's journal ; it is in South Carolina, not far from Camden. 
Here, without doubt, he discovered Sedum pusillum (Diamorpha, 
Nutt.), the habitat of which is said to be " in Carolina Septentrionali, loco 
dieto Flat Rock." Mr. Nuttall, who subsequently collected the plant at 
the same locality, inadvertently continued this mistake, by assigning the 
habitat, " Flat Rock near Camden, North Carolina," as well in his " Genera 
of North American Plants," as in a letter to Dr. Short on this subject. 
(Vide Short on Western Botany, in the " Transylvania Journal of Medicine," 
and in Hooker's " Journal of Botany " for November, 1840, p. 103.) 
the Little Catawba to Lincolnton. In the early part of May 
he revisited Linville Mountain, the Yellow Mountain, the 
Roan, and some others, and then descended Doe River and 
the Holston to Knoxville, Tennessee. Thence, crossing the 
Cumberland Mountains, and a wilderness one hundred and 
twenty miles in extent, he arrived at Nashville on the 16th of 
June, at Danville, Kentucky, on the 27th, and at Louisville 
on the 20th of July. In August he ascended the Wabash to 
Vincennes, crossed the country to the Illinois River, and devoted 
the months of September, October, and November to 
diligent herborizations along the course of that river, the 
Mississippi, the lower part of the Ohio, and throughout the 
country included by these rivers. In December he descended 
the Mississippi in a small boat to the mouth of the Ohio, and 
ascended the latter and the Cumberland to Clarksville, which 
he reached on the 10th of January, 1796, after a perilous 
voyage in the most inclement weather. Leaving that place 
on the 16th, he arrived at Nashville on the 19th of January ; 
and after making a journey to Louisville and back again, he 
started for Carolina at the close of February, crossed the 
Cumberland Mountains early in March, reached Knoxville on 
the Bth, Greenville on the 18th, Jonesborough on the 19th, 
and on the 22d crossed the Iron Mountains into North 
Carolina, descended Cane Creek (which rises in the Roan), 
and spent several days in exploring the mountains in the 
vicinity, with his former guide, Davenport. In April he returned 
to Charleston by his usual route ; and on the 13th of 
August embarked for Amsterdam in the ship Ophir. This 
vessel was wrecked on the coast of Holland, on the 10th of 
October, and Michaux lost a part of the collections he had 
with him ; on the 23d of December, 1796, he arrived at Paris 
Hence some confusion has arisen respecting the locality of this interesting 
plant, since there is both a Flat Rock and a village named Camden in 
North Carolina, although the two are widely separated. After all, 
Pursh's habitat, " on flat rocks in North Carolina, and "elsewhere," proves 
sufficiently correct, since Mr. Nuttall himself, and also Mr. Curtis and 
others, have subsequently obtained it in such situations near Salisbury in 
that State, and Dr. Leavenworth found it abundantly throughout the upper 
district of Georgia. 
with the portion he had saved. This notice of the travels of 
Michaux on this continent will suffice to show with what untiring 
zeal and assiduity his laborious researches were prosecuted 
; it should, however, be remarked, that greater facilities 
were afforded him, in some important respects, than any subsequent 
botanist has enjoyed; the expenses of his journey 
having been entirely defrayed by the French government, 
under whose auspices and direction they were undertaken. 
The name of Fraser, so familiar in the annals of North 
American botany, ought, perhaps, to have preceded that of 
Michaux in our brief sketch ; since the elder Mr. Fraser, who 
had visited Newfoundland previous to the year 1784, commenced 
his researches in the southern States as early as 
1785 ; and Michaux, on his first expedition to the mountains 
in 1787, speaks as having traveled in his company for several 
days. We believe, however, that he did not explore the Alleghany 
Mountains until 1789. Under the patronage of the 
Russian government, he returned to this country in 1799, 
accompanied by his eldest son, and revisited the mountains, 
ascending the beautiful Roan, where, " on a spot which commands 
a view of five States, namely, Kentucky, Virginia, 
Tennessee, North Carolina, and South Carolina, the eye ranging 
to a distance of seventy or eighty miles when the air is 
clear, it was Mr. Fraser's good fortune to discover and collect 
living specimens of the new and splendid Rhododendron 
Catawbiense, from which so many beautiful hybrid varieties 
have since been obtained by skilful cultivators." 1 The father 
and son revisited the Southern States in 1807 ; and the latter, 
after the decease of the father in 1811, returned to this 
country, and continued his indefatigable researches until 
1817. 
Many of the rarest plants of these mountains were made 
1 "Biographical Sketch of John Fraser, the Botanical Collector," in 
Hooker's " Companion to the Botanical Magazine," vol. ii. p. 300 : an 
article from which I have derived nearly all the information I possess respecting 
the researches of the Erasers in this country, and to which the 
reader is referred for more particular information. A full list of the 
North American plants introduced into England by the father and son, is 
appended to that account. 
known especially to English gardens and collections, by Mr. 
John Lyon, whose indefatigable researches are highly spoken 
of by Pursh, Nuttall, and Elliott. It is very probable that he 
had visited the mountains previous to his assuming the charge 
of Mr. Hamilton's collections near Philadelphia, which he 
resigned to Pursh in 1802. At a later period, however, he 
assiduously explored this region, from Georgia as far north at 
least as the Grandfather Mountain ; and died at Asheville in 
Buncombe County, North Carolina, some time between 1814 
and 1818. lam informed by my friend, the Rev. Mr. Curtis, 
that his journals and a portion of his herbarium were preserved 
at Asheville for many years, and that it is probable that they 
may yet be found. 
Michaux the younger, author of the " Sylva Americana," 
who accompanied his father in some of his earlier journeys, 
returned to this country in 1801, and crossed the Alleghany 
Mountains twice ; first in Pennsylvania on his way to the 
western States, and the next year in North Carolina on his 
return to the seaboard. In crossing from Jonesboro', Tennessee, 
to Morganton, by way of Toe River (not Doe River as is 
stated in his Travels), he accidentally stopped at the house of 
Davenport, his father's guide in these mountains. The observations 
of the younger Michaux on this part of the Alleghany 
Mountains, in a chapter of his Travels devoted to that subject, 
are mainly accurate. 
"In the beginning of 1805," Pursh, as he states in the 
preface to his Flora, " set out for the mountains and western 
territories of the southern States, beginning at Maryland and 
extending to the Carolinas (in which tract the interesting 
high mountains of Virginia and Carolina took my particular 
attention), and returning late in the autumn through the 
lower countries along the seaooast to Philadelphia." This 
plan, however, was not fully carried out, since he does not 
appear to have crossed the Alleghanies into the great western 
valley, nor to have botanized along these mountains farther 
south than where the New River crosses the valley of Virginia. 
At any rate, it is certain that the original tickets of his specimens 
in the herbarium of the late Professor Barton, under 
whose patronage he traveled, as well as those in Mr. Lambert's 
herbarium, furnish no evidence that he extended his 
researches into the mountainous portion of North Carolina ; 
but it appears probable (from some labels marked Halifax 
or Mecklenburg, Virginia) that he followed the course of the 
Roanoke into the former State. His most interesting collections 
were made at Harper's Ferry, Natural Bridge, the 
Peaked Mountains (which separate the two principal branches 
of the Shenandoah), the Peaks of Otter, in the Blue Ridge ; 
also, Cove Mountain, Salt Pond Mountain, and Parnell's 
Knob (with the situation of which I am unacquainted), the 
region around the Warm Sulphur Springs, Capon Springs, 
the Sweet Springs, and the mountains of Monroe and Greenbrier 
counties. 
Early in the present century, Mr. Kin, a German nurseryman 
and collector, resident at Philadelphia, traveled somewhat 
extensively among the Alleghany Mountains, chiefly for 
the purpose of obtaining living plants and seeds. He also 
collected many interesting specimens, which may be found in 
the herbaria of Muhlenberg and Willdenow, where his tickets 
may be recognized by the orthography, and the amusing mixture 
of bad English and German (with occasionally some 
very singular Latin) in which his observations are written. 
In the winter of 1816, Mr. Nuttall crossed the mountains 
of North Carolina from the west, ascending the French Broad 
River (along the banks of which he obtained his Philadelphus 
hirsutus, etc.) to Asheville, passing the Blue Ridge, and exploring 
the Table Mountain, where he discovered Hudsonia 
montana, etc., and collected many other rare and interesting 
plants. l 
As early as 1817, the mountains at the sources of the Saluda 
River were visited by the late Dr. Macßride, the friend 
1 The spur of the Blue Ridge from which the picturesque Table Mountain 
rises like a tower, is called by Mr. Nuttall the Catawba Ridge. I 
am informed, however, by my friend Mr. Curtis, who is intimately acquainted 
with this interesting region, that it is not known by that name, 
but is called the Table Mountain Ridge. Its base is not washed by the 
Catawba River, but by its tributary the Linville. 
and correspondent of Elliott ; who, in the preface to the 
second volume of his " Sketch," renders an affecting and deserved 
tribute to his memory, and acknowledges the important 
services which he had rendered to that work during its pro- 
" The name of Rafinesque should also be mentioned in this 
connection ; since that botanist crossed the Alleghanies four 
or five times between 1818 and 1833 (in Pennsylvania, Maryland, 
and the north of Virginia), and also explored the Cumberland 
Mountains. _ _ _ 
A few years since, the Peaks of Otter, in Virginia, were 
visited by Mr. S. B. Buckley ; and still more recently the 
same botanist has explored the mountains in the upper part 
of Alabama and Georgia, and the adjacent borders of North 
Carolina. Among the interesting contributions which the 
authors of the "Flora of North America" have received from 
this source, I may here mention the Coreopsis latifolia of 
Michaux, which had not been found by any subsequent botanist 
until it was observed by Mr. Buckley m the autumn of 
1840. . .. . , , , 
No living botanist, however, is so well acquainted with 
the vegetation of the southern Alleghany Mountains or has 
explored those of North Carolina so extensively, as the Rev. 
Mr M. A. Curtis; who, when resident for a short time m 
their vicinity, visited, as opportunity occurred the Table 
Mountain, Grandfather, the Yellow Mountain, the Roan, the 
Black Mountain, etc., and subsequently (although prevented 
by infirm health from making large collections) extended his 
researches through the counties of Haywood, Macon and 
Cherokee, which form the narrow southwestern extremity of 
North Carolina. To him we are indebted for local information 
which greatly facilitated our recent journey, and, indeed, 
for a complete itinerarium of the region south of Ashe County. 
But, as the latter county had not been visited by Mr. Curtis, 
nor so far as we are aware by any other botanist, and being 
from its situation the most accessible to the traveler from the 
north, we determined to devote to its examination the principal 
part of the time allotted to our own excursion. 
Intending to reach this remote region by the way of the 
Valley of Virginia, we left New York on the evening of the 
22d of June, and traveling by railroad, reached Winchester, 
a distance of three hundred miles, before sunset of the following 
day. At Harper's Ferry, where the Potomac, joined by 
the Shenandoah, forces its way through the Blue Ridge, in the 
midst of some of the most picturesque scenery in the United 
States, we merely stopped to dine, and were therefore disappointed 
in our hope of collecting Sedum telephoides, S. pulchellum, 
Paronychia dichotoma, and Draba ramosissima, all 
of which grow here upon the rocks. We observed the first 
in passing, but it was not yet in flower. On the rocky banks 
of the Potomac below Harper's Ferry, we saw for the first 
time the common Locust-tree (Robinia Pseudacacia) decidedly 
indigenous. It probably extends to the southern confines 
of Pennsylvania ; and from this point south it is everywhere 
abundant, but we did not meet with it east of the Blue 
Ridge. From Winchester, the sliiretown of Frederick County, 
we proceeded by stage-coach directly up the Valley of Virginia, 
as that portion of the State is called which lies between the 
unbroken Blue Ridge and the most easterly ranges of the 
Alleghanies. From the Potomac to the sources of the Shenandoah 
it is, strictly speaking, a valley, from twenty to thirty 
miles in width, with a strong, chiefly limestone soil of great 
fertility. It is scarcely interrupted, indeed, up to where the 
Roanoke rises ; but a branch of the Alleghanies intervenes 
between the latter and New River, as the upper part of the 
Great Kenawha is termed, from which point it loses its character 
in some degree, and is exclusively traversed by the 
western waters. The same valley extends to the north and 
east through Maryland and Pennsylvania, and even into the 
State of New York, preserving throughout the same geolooical 
character and fertile soil. Our first day's ride was to Harrisonburg, 
in Rockingham County, a distance of sixty-nine miles 
from Winchester. From the moment we entered the valley, we 
observed such immense quantities of Echium vulgare, that we 
were no longer surprised at the doubt expressed by Pursh 
whether it was really an introduced plant. This " vile foreign 
weed," as Dr. Darlington, agriculturally speaking, terms this 
showy plant, is occasionally seen along the roadside in the 
northern States ; but here, for the distance of more than a 
hundred miles, it has taken complete possession even of many 
cultivated fields, especially where the limestone approaches 
the surface, presenting a broad expanse of brilliant blue. It 
is surprising that the farmers should allow a biennial like this 
so completely to overrun the land. Another plant much more 
extensively introduced here than in the north (where it 
scarcely deserves the name of a naturalized species) is Bupleurum 
rotundifolium, which in the course of the day we met 
with abundantly. The Marubium vulgare is everywhere naturalized 
; and Euphorbia Lathyris must also be added to the 
list of naturalized plants. The little Verbena angustifolia is 
also a common weed. We collected but a single indigenous 
plant of any interest, and one which we by no means expected 
to find, namely, Carex stenolepsis of Torrey, 1 which here, as 
in western States, to which we supposed it confined, takes the 
place of the northern C. retrorsa. We searched for its constant 
companion, 0. Shortii, and the next day we found the 
two growing together. During the day's ride we observed 
that the bearded wheat was almost exclusively cultivated, and 
were informed that it had been found less subject to the ravages 
of the " Fly " than the ordinary varieties ; which may be 
owing to recent introduction of the seed of the bearded variety 
from districts unmolested by this insect. 
The following day we traveled only sixteen miles on our 
route, but from Mount Sidney made an interesting excursion 
on foot to Weyer's Cave, one of the largest, and certainly the 
most remarkable grotto in the United States. It has been so 
often described as to render any account on our part super- 
1 It is the C. Frankii of Kunth (1837), and of Kunze's Supplement to 
Schkuhr's " Cartography," where it is well figured. It was also distributed 
among Dr. Frank's plants under the name of C. atherodes, and with 
the locality of Baltimore in Pennsylvania ! I had always supposed it to 
be derived from some part of the western States ; but since it abounds 
in the Valley of Virginia, it may have been collected near Baltimore, 
Maryland. 
fluous. Near the cave we saw some trees of Tillia hettrophylia, 
Vent. (T. alba, Michx. f.), and collected a few specimens 
with unopened flower-buds. It appears to be the most 
abundant species along the mountains. 
Our ride next day offered nothing of interest. Near 
Staunton, we saw some patches of Delphinium consolida, 
where it was pretty thoroughly naturalized in the time of 
Pursh. We did not observe Spiraea lobata, which Michaux 
first met with in this vicinity, and which Pursh, as well as 
later botanists, found in various parts of the valley. Passing 
the town of Lexington in the evening, we arrived at the 
Natural Bridge towards morning, where we remained until 
Monday, and had an opportunity of botanizing for a short 
time before we left. On the rocks we found plenty of Asplenium 
Rtita-muraria, Sedun ternatum, and Eraba ramosissima 
with ripe fruit. In the bottom of the ravine, directly 
under the stupendous natural arch (the point which affords 
the most impressive view of this vast chasm), we collected 
specimens of Heuchera villosa, Michx., in fine flower on the 
28th of June ; although, in the higher mountains of North 
Carolina, where it also abounds, the flowers did not appear 
until near the end of July. This species is excellently described 
by Michaux, to whose account it is only necessary to 
add that the petals are very narrow, appearing like sterile filaments. 
Although a smaller plant than PP. Americana, the 
leaves are larger, and vary considerably in the depths of the 
lobes. It is both the PS. villosa and PP. caulescens of Pursh, 
who probably derived the latter name from the strong elongated 
rhizoma, often projecting and appearing like a suffrutescent 
stem, by which the plant is attached to the rocks ; 
since he does not describe the scape as leafy, nor is this at 
all the case in the original specimens. The H. caulescens of 
Torrey and Gray's Flora with the synonym, must also be 
united with PP. villosa, which in that work is chiefly described 
from specimens collected by Dr. Short in Kentucky, where 
everything seems to grow with extraordinary luxuriance. 
With these, the plant we collected entirely accords except 
that the leaves are mostly smaller, and more deeply lobed ; 
but this character is not constant. 1 Soon after leaving 
Natural Bridge, we observed indigenous trees of the Honey 
Locust (Gleditschia triacanthos), also FEsculus Paviaf 
and, in crossing the valley of the James River, we noticed 
the Papaw (Uvaria triloba) and Negundo. The roadside 
was almost everywhere occupied with Verbesina Siegesbeckia 
not yet in flower ; and in many places with Melissa ( Calamintha) 
Nepeta, which Mr. Bentham has not noticed as an 
American plant, although Pursh has it as a native of the 
country. It was, however, doubtless introduced from Europe, 
but is completely naturalized in the valley of Virginia, in 
Tennessee, and in North Carolina east of the Blue Ridge. 
On Tuesday, the 29th of June, we crossed the New River, 
arrived at Wytheville, or Wythe Court House, towards evening; 
and at Marion, or Smythe Court House, on the Middle 
Fork of the Holston, early the next morning. The vegetation 
of this elevated region is almost entirely similar to 
that of the northern States. The only herbaceous plants we 
noticed, as we passed rapidly along, which we had not seen 
growing before, were Galax aphylla, and Silene Virginica, : 
the showy, deep-red flowers of the latter, no less than the different 
habitus, caused us to wonder how it could ever have 
been confounded with the northern S. Pennsylvanica. The 
only forest tree with which we were not previously familiar 
was, the large Buckeye, JEsculus flava, which abounds in 
this region, and attains the height of sixty to ninety feet, and 
the diameter of two or three feet or more at the base. 
At Marion we determined to leave the valley road, and to 
cross the mountains into Ashe County, North Carolina ; the 
morning was occupied in seeking a conveyance for this pur- 
i Much to our disappointment we did not meet with Heuchera hispida, 
although I have since learned from an inspection of Barton's herbarium, 
that we passed within a moderate distance from the place where Pursh 
discovered it. The habitat given on the original ticket, " High Mountains 
between Fincastle and the Sweet Springs, and some other similar 
places," we here cite, with the hope that it may guide some botanist to 
its rediscovery. The habitat in Pursh's Flora, " High Mountains of Virginia 
and Carolina," is probably a mere guess, so far as relates to the 
latter State. 
pose. With considerable difficulty we at length procured a 
carry-all (a light, covered wagon with springs, drawn by a 
single horse), capable of conveying our luggage and a single 
person besides the driver, a simple shoemaker who had never 
before undertaken so formidable a journey, and who accordino-ly 
proved entirely wanting in the skill and tact necessary 
for conducting so frail a vehicle over such difficult mountain 
tracks, for roads they can scarcely be called. We had first 
to ascend the steep ridge interposed between the middle and 
south Forks of the Holston, called Brushy Mountain, during 
the ascent of which we commenced botanizing in earnest. 
The first interesting plant we met with was Saxifraga erosa 
of Pursh, but only with ripe fruit, and even with the seeds 
for the most part fallen from the capsules. The same- locality 
also furnished us with specimens of the pretty Thalictrum 
fllipes, Torr. & Gray (to which the name of T. clavatum, 
DC. must be restored), a plant which abounds along all the 
cold and clear brooks throughout the mountains of North 
Carolina ; where it could not well have escaped the notice of 
Michaux, in whose herbarium De Candolle found the specimen 
(with no indication of its habitat) on which his T clavatum 
was established. The authors of the " Flora of North 
America," having only an imperfect fruiting specimen of 
their T. fllipes, and not sufficiently remarking the discrepancies 
between the T. clavatum, Hook. " Fl. Bor.-Am." and 
the figure and description of De Candolle's plant, in regard 
to the length of the styles, assumed the former to be the true 
T. clavatum,, and described their own plant as a new species. 
But our specimens accord so perfectly with the figure of 
Delessert (except in the greater but variable length of the 
stipes to the fruit, and in the veining of the carpels, which, 
doubtless by an oversight of the artist, is omitted in the figure) 
as to leave no doubt of their identity. The subarctic 
plant may be appropriately called T. Richardsonii, in honor 
of its discoverer. The flowers of this species are uniformly 
perfect, as indeed they are figured by Delessert, although 
De Candolle has otherwise described them. It is a slender, 
delicate plant, from eight to twelve, or rarely exceeding eigh- 
teen inches in height, with pure white flowers. During this 
ascent we collected Galium latifolium, Michx., just coming 
into flower ; and we subsequently found this species so widely 
diffused throughout the mountains of North Carolina, that we 
were much surprised at its remaining so little known since 
the time of Michaux. On a moist, rocky bank by the roadside, 
we gathered some specimens of a Scutellaria, which did 
not again occur to us. It proves to be a species mentioned 
by Mr. Bentham under S. serrata, and subsequently described 
by Dr. Riddell with the name of S. saxatilis, which 
apparently is not of uncommon occurrence westward of the 
Alleghany Mountains. It is a slender plant, from six to 
twenty inches high ; and the stems often produce slender subterranean 
runners from their base. We here also collected 
Asarum Virginicum, Linn, in similar situations. In the 
higher mountains the northern A. Canadense takes the place 
of the former species, while A. arifolium, Michx. seems to 
be confined to the lower country. The banks of the shady 
and cool rivulets, which we crossed every few minutes during 
our ascent, were in many places covered by the prostrate or 
creeping PPedyotis serpyllifolia, Torr. & Gray (IPoustonia 
serpyllifolia, Michx.), which continues to flower sparingly 
throughout the summer. This pretty plant has quite the 
habit of Arenaria Balearica ; and the root is certainly perennial. 
We found it very abundant in similar situations 
throughout this mountain region. Towards the summit of 
this ridge we first met with the Magnolia Fraseri (M. 
auriculata, Bart.), which resembles the Umbrella-tree 
(Magnolia Umbrella) in the disposition of its leaves at the 
extremity of the branches. This, as well as M. acuminata 
(the only other species of Magnolia that we observed), is 
occasionally termed Cucumber-tree ; but the people of the 
country almost uniformly called the former Wahoo, a name 
which in the lower part of the southern States is applied to 
Ulmus alata, or often to all the Elms indifferently. The 
bitter and somewhat aromatic infusion of the green cones of 
both these Magnolias in whiskey or apple-brandy is very 
extensively employed as a preventive against intermittent 
fevers ; a use which, as the younger Michaux remarks, would 
doubtless be much less frequent, if, with the same medical 
properties, the aqueous infusion were substituted. 
Nearly at the top of this mountain we overtook our awkward 
driver, awaiting our arrival in perfect helplessness, having 
contrived to break his carriage upon a heap of stones, and 
to overthrow his horse into the boughs of a prostrate tree. 
So much time was occupied in extricating the poor animal 
and in temporary repairs to the wagon, that we had. barely 
time to descend the mountain on the opposite side, and to 
seek lodgings for the night in the secluded valley of the South 
Fork of the Holston. In moist, shady places along the descent 
of this mountain, and in similar situations throughout 
the mountains of North Carolina, we found plenty of the 
northern Listera convallarioides, in fine state, entirely simi-' 
lar to the plant from Vermont, Canada, Newfoundland, and 
the Northwest Coast, and agreeing completely with the figure 
of Swartz (in Weber & Mohr, " Beitrage zur Naturkunde," 
1., 1805, p. 2, t. I.), and the recent one of Hooker's "Flora 
Boreali Americana." It is difficult to conceive why Willde- 
now should cite the Ophrys cordata of Michaux under the 
Epipa,ctis convallarioides of Swartz, while there is so little 
accordance in their characters ; but this has not prevented 
Pursh from combining the specific phrase of the two authors 
into one, while he assigns a locality for the plant (New Jers 
y), where the Listera convallarioides certainly does not 
grow. The Rev. Mr. Curtis, I believe, first detected the 
plant in these mountains. 
The next day (July 1) we crossed the Iron Mountains 
(the great chain which divides the States of North Carolina 
and Tennessee, and which here forms the northwestern boundary 
of Grayson County, Virginia) by Fox-Creek Gap, and 
traversing the numerous tributaries of the North Fork of the 
New River, which abundantly water this sequestered region, 
we slept a few miles beyond the boundary of North Carolina, 
after a journey of nearly thirty miles. It must not be imagined 
that we found hotels or taverns for our accommodation ; 
as, except at Ashe Court House, we saw no house of public 
entertainment from the time we left the valley of Virginia 
until we finally crossed the Blue Ridge and quitted the mountain 
region. Yet we suffered little inconvenience on this account, 
as we were cordially received at the farm-houses along 
the road, and entertained according to the means and ability 
of the owners ; who seldom hesitated either to make a moderate 
charge, or to accept a proper compensation for their 
hospitality, which we therefore did not hesitate to solicit from 
time to time. On the Iron Mountains we met with nearly 
all the species we had collected during the previous day, and 
with a single additional plant of much interest, namely, the 
Boykinia aconitifolia, Nutt. We found it in the greatest 
abundance and luxuriance on the southern side of the mountain, 
near the summit, along the rocky margins of a small 
brook, which for a short distance were completely covered 
with the plant. It here attains the height of two feet or 
more ; the stems, rising from a thick rhizoma (and clothed 
below, as well as the petioles, with deciduous rusty hairs), are 
terminated by a panicle of small cymes, which at first are 
crowded, but at length are loose, with the flowers mostly unilateral. 
The rather large, pure white petals are deciduous 
after flowering, not marcescent as in Saxifraga and Heuchera. 
We did not again meet with this plant ; but Mr. Curtis collected 
it several years ago near the head of Linville River, 
and Mr. Buckley obtained it in the mountains of Alabama. 
It also extends further north than our own locality; for, 
although not described in his Flora, Pursh collected it on 
the Salt-Pond Mountain in Virginia. 1 I have little doubt 
that the Saxifraga Richardsonii would be more correctly 
transferred to Boykinia, as well as the S. ranunculifolia ; 
and, since the S. data of Nuttall, in Torrey and Gray's 
1 The specimen in Professor Barton's herbarium (in fruit) is ticketed 
by Pursh : " Heuchera villosa, Michx. ? Salt-Pond Mountain, under the 
naked knob, near a spring. This spring is the highest I have seen." I 
know not the exact situation of this mountain from which Pursh obtained 
many interesting plants. The Boykinia aconitifolia, I may remark, would 
be a'very desirable plant in cultivation, and might be expected to endure 
the winter of New York and Philadelphia ; it would certainly flourish in 
England. 
" Flora," is referred to Boykinia occidentalis, in the supplement 
to that work, no pentandrous Saxifrage remains, except 
the ambiguous S. Sullivantii, Torr. & Gr. But the authors 
of the Flora having received fruiting specimens of this 
interesting plant, do not hesitate to remove it from the genus 
to which it was provisionally appended, and to dedicate it to 
their esteemed correspondent, the promising botanist who discovered 
it. 1 
While descending the mountain on the opposite side, we 
met with Clethra acuminata, a very distinct and almost arborescent 
species, which is well characterized by Michaux. The 
flowers were not yet expanded ; but towards the end of July 
we obtained from other localities specimens in full flower, 
while the racemes and capsules of the preceding year were 
still persistent. The conspicuous bracts, it may be remarked, 
are as caducous in the wild as they are said to be in the 
cultivated plant; usually falling before the flower-buds have 
attained their full size. We also saw Campanula divancata, 
Michx., not yet in flower ; and obtained fruiting specimens 
of the Convallaria umbellulata, Michx. (Clintonia, Raf., not 
of Dough). While the character in Michaux is drawn from 
i Sullivantia. Torrey & Gray, " Fl. N. Amer." suppl. med. - Calyx 
inferne imo ovario adnatus, limbo quinquefido. Petala 5 spathulata, unguiculata, 
integra, summo calycis tubo inserta, marcescentia. Stamina 
5, laciniis calycinis breviora : antheraj biloculares. Styli, 2, breves ; 
stigmatibus simplicibus. Capsula calyce inclusa, bilocularis, birostris, 
polyspermy rostris intus longitudinaliter dehiscentibus. Semma adscendentia, 
scobiformia ; testa membracea, relaxata, utrinque ultra nucleum 
ovalem alatim prodncta. Embryo cylindricus albumine vix brevior. — 
Herba humilis, in rupibus calcareis Ohionis vigens ; radice fibrosa perenni 
; foliis plerisque radicalibus, rotundato-reniformibus, inciso-dentatis 
sublobatisve, longe petiolatis ; scapo gracili, decumbente ; floribus parvis 
(corolla conspicua, alba), cymuloso-paniculatis, post anthesin in apicem 
pedicellorum arete deflexis. 
S. Ohionis. — Saxifraga t Sullivantii, Torrey & Gray, " Fl. N. Amer. ' 
i. 575. — Genus a Saxifraga praecipue diversum staminibus petalis isomeris, 
et seminibus scobiformibus : a Boykinia calyce fere libero, atque 
seminibus ; ah Heuchera capsula biloculari, etc. ; a Leptarrhena staminibus 
5, antheris bilocularibus, et seminibus alato-marginatis, nee utrinque 
subulatis. 
this species, the " planta Canadensis " there mentioned is the 
nearly allied Dracaina borealis of the " Hortus Kewensis." 
The two species are mixed in Michaux's herbarium ; and, although 
the latter is almost exclusively a northern plant, we 
found the two species growing together on the Grandfather, 
Roan, and other high mountains of North Carolina. Towards 
the base of the mountain we saw for the first time the 
Pyrularia of Michaux (Oil-nut, Buffalo-tree, etc. ; PPamiltonia 
oleifera, Muhl.) : a low shrub which is not of unfrequent 
occurrence in rich, shady soil. Its geographical range 
extends from the Cherokee country on the confines of Georgia 
(where the elder Michaux discovered it on his earliest visit 
to the mountains, and where Mr. Curtis has recently observed 
it), to the western ranges of the Alleghanies of Pennsylvania 
in lat. 40°, where it was found by the younger Michaux. 1 It 
flowers early in the season, and the oleaginous fruit in the 
specimens we collected had attained the size of a musket-ball. 
In wet places, on the very borders of North Carolina, but 
still within Virginia, we first met with Trautvetteria palmata 
and SDiphylleia cymosa ; the former in full flower, the latter 
in fruit. Trautvetteria, which I doubt not is more nearly 
allied to Thalictrum than to Cimicifuga or Actaaa, was collected 
by Pursh in Virginia, both on the Salt-Pond Mountain 
and on the Peaks of Otter. The Diphylleia is confined to 
springy places, and the margins of the shaded mountain 
brooks, and the rich and deep alluvial soil which is so general 
throughout these mountains, never occurring perhaps at a 
lower elevation than three thousand feet above the level of 
the sea. It is a more striking plant than we had supposed ; 
the cauline leaves (generally two, but sometimes three in 
number) being often two feet in diameter, and the radicle, 
which is obicular and centrally peltate as in Podophyllum, 
frequently still larger ; so that it is not easy (at this season) 
to obtain manageable specimens. The branches of the cymes 
are usually reddish or purple, and the gibbous deep blue and 
glaucous berries are almost dry when ripe. The latter often 
1 " Travels to the Westward of the Alleghany Mountains," etc. English 
edition, p. 57, etc. 
contain as many as four perfect seeds ; and it is proper to 
remark that the embryo is not "very minute," as described 
in the " Flora of North America " ; but, in the ripe seeds 
recently examined, is one third the length of the albumen, 
as stated by Decaisne, or even longer. The cotyledons are 
elliptical, flatfish, and nearly the length of the thick, slightly 
club-shaped radicle. The whole embryo is also somewhat 
flattened ; so that when the seed is longitudinally divided in 
one direction, the embryo, examined in place, appears to be 
very slender, and to agree with De Candolle's description. 
The albumen is horny when dry, and has a bitter taste. 
Along the roadside we shortly afterwards collected the equivocal 
Vaccinium erythrocarpum of Michaux, or Oxycoccus erectus 
of Pursh ; a low, erect, dichotomously branched shrub, 
with the habit, foliage, and fruit of Vaccinium, but the flowers 
of Oxycoccus. It here occurred at a lower elevation than 
usual, scarcely more than three thousand feet above the level 
of the sea, and in a dwarfish state (about a foot high) : subsequently 
we only met with it on the summit of the Grandfather 
and other mountains which exceed the altitude of five 
thousand feet, where it is commonly three or four feet high. 
We were too early for the fruit, a small, red or purplish 
berry, which does not ripen until August or September. It 
has an exquisite flavor, according to Pursh, who found the 
plant on the mountains of Virginia ; but our friend Mr. 
Curtis informs us that it is rather insipid, and entirely destitute 
of the fine acidity of the cranberry. 
On the 2d of July we continued our journey (eleven miles) 
to Jefferson or Ashe Court House, a hamlet of twenty or 
thirty houses, and the only village in the county. Intending 
to make this place our headquarters while we remained in the 
region, we had the good fortune to find excellent accommodations 
at the house of Colonel Bower, who evinced every disposition 
to further our inquiries, and afforded us very important 
assistance. We may remark indeed, that during our 
residence amongst the mountains we were uniformly received 
with courtesy by the inhabitants ; who for the most part 
lacked the general intelligence of our obliging host at Jeffer- 
son, and could scarcely be made to comprehend the object of 
our visit, or why we should come from a distance of seven 
hundred miles to toil over the mountains in quest of their 
common and disregarded herbs. Curiosities as we were to 
these good folks, their endless queries had no air of impertinence, 
and they entertained us to the best of their ability, 
never attempting to make unreasonable charges. A very fastidious 
palate might occasionally be at a loss ; but good cornbread 
and milk are everywhere abundant ; the latter being 
used from preference quite sour, or even curdled. Sweet 
milk appears to be very generally disliked, being thought less 
wholesome, and more likely to produce the "milk sickness," 
which is prevalent in some very circumscribed districts ; so 
that our dislike of sour and fondness for sweet milk was regarded 
by this simple people as one of our very many oddities. 
Nearly every farmer has a small dairy-house built over 
a cold brook or spring, by which the milk and butter are kept 
cool and sweet in the warmest weather. 
We botanized for several days upon the mountains in the 
immediate neighborhood of Jefferson, especially the Negro 
Mountain, which rises abruptly on one side of the village, the 
Phoenix Mountain, a sharp ridge on the other side, and the 
Bluff, a few miles distant in a westerly direction. The altitude 
of the former is probably between four and five thousand 
feet above the sea ; the latter is apparently somewhat 
higher. They are all composed of Mica-slate ; and we should 
remark that we entered upon a primitive region immediately 
upon leaving the Valley of Virginia. The mountain sides, 
though steep or precipitous, are covered with a rich and deep 
vegetable mould, and are heavily timbered, chiefly with 
Chestnut, White Oak, the Tulip-tree, the Cucumber-tree, and 
sometimes the Sugar Maple. Their vegetation presents so 
little diversity, that it is for the most part unnecessary to distinguish 
particular localities. Besides many of the plants 
already mentioned, and a very considerable number of northern 
species which we have not room to enumerate, we collected 
or observed on the mountain sides, Clematis Viorna in great 
abundance ; Tradescantia Virginica ; Pris cristata in fruit ; 
PPedyotis (Amphiotis) purpurea, which scarcely deserves the 
name, since the flowers are commonly almost white ; Phlox 
paniculata ? Aristolochia Sipho, without flowers or fruit ; 
Ribes Cynosbati, rotundifolium, Michx. (R. triflorum, 
Willd.) and prostratum, L'Her. ; Allium cernuum and tricoccum 
x Galax aphylla ; Ligusticum actceifolium, the 
strong-scented roots of which are eagerly sought and eaten 
by boys and hogs ;2; 2 The Ginseng, here called " sang " (the 
roots of which are largely collected, and sold to the country 
merchants when fresh for about twelve cents per pound, or 
when dry for triple that price) ; Menziesia globularis, mostly 
in fruit ; and the showy Azalea calendulacea, which was also 
out of flower, except in deep shade. 3 In the latter situations 
i The latter is known throughout this region by the name of 
" Ramps " ; doubtless a corruption of « Ramsons," the popular appellation 
of A. ursinum in England. 
2 It is here termed " Angelico" ; while in Virginia it is called " Nondo." 
Bartram (Travels, p. 45, and p. 367), who found it in Georgia, 
notices it under the name of Angelica lucida, or " White-root "of the 
Creek and Cherokee traders. " Its aromatic carminative root is in taste 
much like that of ginseng, though more of the taste and scent of aniseseed 
: it is in high estimation with the Indians as well as white inhabitants, 
and sells at a great price to the southern Indians of Florida, who 
dwell near the sea-coast, where this never grows spontaneously." (Bartrain, 
I. c.) 
8 Bartram well describes this species, under the name of Azalea flammea, 
or fiery Azalea. " The epithet fiery I annex to this most celebrated 
species of Azalea, as being expressive of the appearance of its flowers ; 
which are in general of the color of the finest red-lead, orange and bright 
gold, as well as yellow and cream-color. These various splendid colors 
are not only in separate plants, but frequently all the varieties and shades 
are seen in separate branches on the Same plant ; and the clusters of the 
blossoms cover the shrubs in such incredible profusion on the hillsides, 
that suddenly opening to view from dark shades, we are alarmed with 
apprehension of the woods being set on fire. This is certainly the most 
gay and brilliant flowering shrub yet known ; they grow in little copses 
or clumps, in open forests as well as dark groves, with other shrubs, and 
about the bases of hills, especially where brooks and rivulets wind about 
them ; the bushes seldom rise above six or seven feet in height, and generally 
but three, four, or five, but branch and spread their tops greatly ; 
the young leaves are but very small whilst the shrubs are in bloom, from 
which circumstance the plant exhibits a greater show of splendor." 
(Bartram's Travels, p. 323.) 
we found an arborescent tetramerous species of Prinos (in 
fruit only), with large and membranaceous ovate leaves. 
The same species has been collected on the Pokono Mountains 
in Pennsylvania by Mr. Wolle, and on the Catskills by 
Mr. S. T. Carey. We should deem it the P. Icevigatus of 
Pursh (not of Torrey, Fl. Northern States), on account of 
the solitary and subsessile fertile flowers, as well as the 
habitat, were not the flowers of that species said to be hex- 
amerous. 
In damp, very shady places high up the Negro Mountain 
we saw an Aconitum not yet in flower ; and on moist rocks 
near the summit, obtained a few fruiting specimens of a Saxifraga 
which was entirely new to us. In a single very secluded 
spot on the north side of the mountain, near the summit, the 
rocks were covered with a beautiful small Fern, which proves 
to be the Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum of Michaux, the A. 
montanum, Willd., an extremely rare plant. It is certainly 
distinct from the A. Adiantum-nigrum; being not only a 
much smaller and more delicate species (two to four inches 
high), but the fronds are narrower, the pinna; ovate and 
much shorter, 3-5 parted, with the pinnulse toothed or in- 
cised at the apex. 
The Veratrum parviflorum, Michx., is of frequent occurrence 
throughout this region, but was not yet fully in flower, 
so that our specimens were not collected until near the end of 
July. The plant is excellently described in the Flora of 
Michaux, where it is, probably with justice, referred to Veratrum 
rather than to Melanthium ; since the divisions of the 
perianth (yellowish-green from the first) are wholly destitute 
of glands, and only differ from Veratrum in being stellate, 
and tapering at the base. I may here remark that the name 
Melanthium must undoubtedly be retained for M Virginicum 
and M. hybridum. Some years since, in rearranging the 
North American species of this family, I followed Reamer 
and Schultes in adopting the genus Leimanthium of Willdenow, 
without considering that Melanthium was established by 
Clayton and Gronovius on M. Virginicum, and thus taken 
up by Linnams, with the addition of a Siberian plant, which 
belongs to Zigadenus. 1 The Melanthium Capense (Androcymbium, 
Willd.) was added some time afterwards. 
The rocky summits of the mountains afforded us Sedum telephoides 
; Heuchera villosa ; Paronychia argyrocoma, which 
forms dense silvery tufts on the highest and most exposed 
peaks ; Veronica officinalis, serpyllifolia, and agrestis (all 
certainly native) ; Lycopodium mpestre, in a very beautiful 
state, and on the Phoenix Mountain we found a solitary specimen 
of L. Selago ; Arabis lyrata, with perfectly accumbent 
cotyledons ; Potentilla tridentata, which we only saw on the 
Bluff Mountain ; Woodsia Rvensis ; Saxifraga leucanthemifolia, 
which not unfrequently attains the height of two feet, 
with a large and slender effuse panicle ; Diervilla trifida, 
entirely resembling the northern plant ; Pyrus melanocarpa ; 
Sorbus Americana, B. microcarpa ; Rhododendron Cataw- 
biense, just out of flower, while R. maximum, extremely 
abundant along the streams and mountain sides, was only beginning 
to expand its blossoms. 2 In such situations also we 
found a marked dwarfish variety of PPedyotis purpurea, growing 
somewhat in tufts, and scarcely exceeding four or five 
inches in height. The flowers, which are deep pink, while in 
the ordinary form in this region they are nearly white, present 
the dimorphism which obtains in several sections of the 
genus ; the stamens in some specimens being inserted in the 
throat of the corolla and exsert, while in others they are inserted 
near the base of the tube and included ; in the former 
the style is uniformly short and included, and in the latter 
long and somewhat exserted. These two forms were often 
seen growing side by side, and appeared to be equally fertile. 
The Amianthium musccetoxicum, which is common in 
the low country of the southern States, we here found only 
1 The Helonias glaberrima, " Botanical Magazine," t. 1680, on which Zigadenus 
commutatus of Schultes is founded, is Z. glaucus ; the specimens 
came from Fraser's nursery, but doubtless were not derived from the 
southern States. Helonias bracteata, " Botanical Magazine," t. 1703, is 
Z- glaberrimus, Michx., not fully developed. 
2 These shrubs bear the name of " Laurel " ; while the Kalmia latifolia 
is universally called "Ivy," or " Ivy-bush." 
in the rich open woods of the Bluff Mountain, and in similar 
places further south. The flowers are pure white or creamcolor, 
in a dense and very showy raceme, at length changing 
to green. The cattle which roam in the woods for a great 
part of the year are sometimes poisoned by feeding, as is supposed, 
on the foliage of this plant during the autumn : hence 
its name of " Fall-poison." The wild Pea-vine, which is so 
highly prized as an autumnal feed for cattle, is the Amphicarpaaa 
1 The Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis), 
which we occasionally met with in fruit, appears to be identical 
with the European plant. It extends from the mountains 
of Virginia to Georgia, where it was long ago noticed by the 
younger Bartram. We also collected a handsome Phlox, of 
frequent occurrence in rich woods, which differs from P. 
Carolina (with which it has perhaps been confounded) in its 
perfectly smooth stem, and broader, less pointed calyx-teeth. 
The leaves are sometimes an inch in width, and four or five 
in length ; the uppermost often ovate-lanceolate, and more or 
less cordate at the base. 
A species of Carex, nearly allied to C. gracillima, occurs 
in the greatest abundance on all the higher mountains of 
North Carolina, forming tufts on the earth or on rocks, and 
flowering throughout the summer. On this account it is 
called C. aestivalis by Mr. Curtis, who discovered it several 
years since, and pointed out its characters. 2 We also met 
1 In the large woods the surface of the soil is covered with a species of 
wild peas, which rise three feet above the earth, and of which the cattle 
are very greedy. They prefer this pasture to every other, and when removed 
from it they fall away, or make their escape to return to it." 
(Michaux, F. A., Travels, p. 316.) 
2 C. aestivalis (M. A. Curtis, ined.) : spicis 3-5 gracilibus laxiflons 
suberectis, infirma pedunculata, ceteris subsessilibus, snprema androgyna 
interne mascula, bracteis inferioribus foliaceis vix vaginantibus superioribus 
setaceis, perigyniis ovoideis trigonis basi apiceque acutiusculis 
obsolete nervosis glabris ore subintegro squamam ovatam obtusam (nunc 
mucronatam) duplo superantibus, stigmatibus tribus, vaginis foliorum in- 
feriorum pubescentibus. 
Hab. in montibus altioribus Carolina? Septentrionalis übique. Julio- 
Augusto floret. —C. ejracillima; nimis affinis ; at diversa, culmis foliisque 
gracilioribus, vaginis infirmis pubescentibus ; bracteis vix vaginantibus ; 
with C. canescens, Linn, ex Boott (C. Buxbaumii, Wahl.) 
and C conoidea, Schk., on the moist grassy brow of a precipice 
of the Bluff ; and towards the base of the Negro Mountain 
we observed C. virescens and C. digitalis, Willd. 
In a cool, sequestered brook, we found the true Cardarnine 
rotundifolia, Michx., growing like the Water-cress (for 
which it might be substituted, as its leaves have exactly the 
same taste), but producing numerous stolons two or three or 
spicis angustioribus et laxifloris ereetis, superioribus brevissime pedunculatis 
; acheniis oblongo-ovoideis magis stipitatis. 
The figure of C. gracillima, in Professor Kunze's Supplement to 
Schkuhr's Carices, is excellent, except that the immature perigynia are 
represented with more distinct beaks than I have ever seen. To this 
genus, already perhaps the most extensive in the vegetable kingdom, 
after Senecio, Mr. Sullivant has recently added another species, an account 
of which may be appended to this note. As Dr. Boott had already 
dedicated it to the zealous discoverer, without being aware that he had 
distributed it under another name, I trust I may be allowed to publish the 
notes of this sedulous caricographer unchanged : 
"C. Sullivantii (Boott) : spica mascula solitaria cylindrica, fcemineis 
3-5 cylindricis ereetis gracilibus pedunculatis laxifloris, superioribus eontiguis, 
infirma remota longe peduneulata basi attenuata, stigmatibus tribus, 
perigyniis ellipticis brevi-rostratis emarginatis pellucido-punctatis apice 
marginibusque piloso-hispidis squamam ovatam ciliatam hispido-mucronatam 
suba?quantibus. 
"Culmus bipedalis, gracilis, triqueter, pilis albis sparsis longis scabrius- 
Oulus, pars spicas gerens 2-9-uncialis. Folia 2 lin. lata, culmo breviora, 
marginibus nervisque scabris. Bractea infirma vaginans, foliacea, culmum 
adajquans, reliquse sensim breviores, superiores evaginata? demum setacese. 
Spica mascula uncialis, vix lineam lata, sessilis vel brevi-pedunculata: 
squama?, muticse, obtusae, apice ciliobata?, nemo scatro, pallida? 
castaneae spicse fcemieae 3-5, laxiflora?, 1-1^ uncias longa?, 1-1^ lineas 
lata? ; superiores contigua? ; infirma remota (uno exemplo basi composita) ; 
squama? pellucida? ciliolata?, nervo viridi seabro, hispido-mucronatse. Peuuuculi 
scabri, superiores sensim breviores. Perigynium (vix maturum) 
S un. longum, 1 lin. latum, viride, enervium ? apice hispidulum, ciliatum, 
orevistipitatum, squamam subsequans vel eo paululum longing. Achenium 
immaturum." (Boott in litt.) 
Hah. in sylvaticis prope Columbum, Ohionis, übi detexit W. S. Sulli- 
y ant, cum C. pubescente, C. gracillima, etc. vigens. Affinis C. arctatce (C. 
J vatica?, auct. Amer.) ex cl. Boott. — In exemplis nuperrime receptis, 
P Wgynia satis matura sunt ovato-elliptica, lata, compresso-plana, ener- 
v 'a (marginibus exceptis), apice vix rostrata. 
more feet in length. These runners arise not only from the 
base of the stem, but from the axils of the upper leaves, and 
very frequently from the apex of the weak ascending raceme 
itself, which is thus prolonged into a leafy stolon, hanging 
down into the water or mud, where it takes root. Its habit 
and appearance are so unlike even the summer state of our 
northern C. rhomboidea, that we could not hesitate to consider 
it a distinct species. The subjoined diagnostic character 
will doubtless suffice for its discrimination. 1 
On the 7th of July we started for the high mountains 
farther south, having hired a cumbrous and unsightly, but 
convenient tilted wagon, with a pair of horses and a driver 
(who rode one of the horses, according to the usual custom of 
this region), for the conveyance of our luggage, and which 
afforded us, at intervals, the luxury of reposing on straw at 
the bottom, while we were dragged along at the rate of two or 
three miles an hour. 
Our first day's journey of about twenty-four miles was 
somewhat tedious, as we found no new plants of any interest. 
We saw, however, a variety of Lonicera parviflora ? with 
larger leaves and flowers than ordinary, the latter dull purplish 
; probably the Caprifolium bracteosum, var. floribus 
violaceo-purpureis of Michaux. The following morning we 
reached the Watauga River (a tributary of the Holston) ; 
and leaving our driver to follow up the banks of the stream 
to the termination of the road at the foot of the Grandfather, 
we ascended an adjacent mountain, called Hanging-rock, and 
reached our quarters for the night by a different route. The 
fine and close view of the rugged Grandfather amply rewarded 
1 Cardamine rotundifolia (Michx.) : glaberrimer decumbens, stolonibus 
repentibus, radice fibrosa, foliis omnibus conformibus (radicalibus sa?pe 
trisectis, segmentis lateralibus parvis), petiolatis rotundatis plerumque 
subcordatis integriusculis vel repando sinuatis, siliquis parvis stylo subulatis, 
stigmate minuto, seminibus ovalibus. C. rotundifolia, Michx., Fl. 2, 
p. 30 ; Hook., Bot. Misc., 3, t. 109, (statu vernali : in exemplis Carolinianis 
folia caulinia magis petiolata;) Darlingt., Fl. Cest., ed. 2, p. 384. 
C. rotundifolia, Torr. & Gray, Fl. N. Amer., i. p. 88. 
Hab. in rivulis fontibusque opaculis montium Carolina?, Virginias, 
Kentucky, et in Pennsylvania. 
BOTANICAL EXCURSION TO NORTH CAROLINA. 53 
the toil of ascending this beetling cliff, where we also obtained 
the Geum (Sieversia) radiatum, probably the most 
showy species of the genus. The brilliant golden flowers 
have a disposition to double, even in the wild state, m which 
we often found as many as eight or nine petals. This tendency 
would doubtless be fully developed by cultivation. 
Around the base of these mountains we saw Bleplnha nepetoicles, 
and another Labiate plant not yet in flower, which 
we took for Pycnanthemum montanum, Michx. 
The next day (July 9th) we ascended the Grandfather, the 
hiohest as well as the most rugged and savage mountain we 
had yet attempted; although by no means the most elevated 
in North Carolina, as has generally been supposed. It is a 
sharp and craggy ridge, lying within Ashe and Burke comi 
ties very near the northeast corner of Yancey and cutting 
adHhe chain to which it belongs (the Blue Ridge) nearly 
at right angles. It is entirely covered with trees except where 
the locks are absolutely perpendicular; and towards the summit 
the Balsam Fir of these mountains, Abies balsamfera, 
partly, of Michaux's Flora (but not of the younger Michaux's 
Sylva), the A. Fraseri, Pursh, prevails, accompanied 
by the Abies nigra or Black Spruce. The earth, rocks, 
and prostrate decaying trunks, in the shade of these trees, are 
carpeted with mosses and lichens; and the whole present the 
most perfect resemblance to the dark and sombre forests of 
the northern parts of New York and Vermont, except that the 
trees are here much smaller. The resemblance extends to the 
whole vegetation; and a list of the shrubs and herbaceous 
plants of this mountain would be found to include a large 
portion of the common plants of the extreme northern States 
and Canada. 2 Indeed the vegetation is essentially Canadian, 
1 According to Professor Mitchel's barometrical measurements the 
Grandfather attains the altitude of five thousand five hundred and fiftyshe 
feet above the level of the sea; the Roan, six thousand and thirtyeight 
feet ; and the highest peak of the Black Mountain six thousand 
foAr hundred and seventy-six feet, which exceeds Mount Washington m 
New Hampshire (hitherto accounted the highest mountain in the United 
States) by more than two hundred feet. 
2 Among the northern species which we had not previously observed 
with a considerable number of peculiar species intermixed. 
Under the guidance of Mr. Levi Moody we followed the Watauga, 
here a mere creek, for four or five miles along the base 
of the Grandfather, until we reached a ridge which promised 
a comparatively easy ascent. In the rich soil of this ridge, at 
an elevation of about four hundred feet above the Watauga, 
we found one of the plants which of all others we were desirous 
of obtaining, namely, Carex Fraseriana. Mr. Curtis 
had made diligent but ineffectual search for this most singular 
and rarest of Carices, " along the Catawba near Morganton," 
and "near Table Mountain," where Fraser is said to 
have discovered it; and we believe that no subsequent botanist 
has ever met with it, except Mr. Kin, whose specimen in 
Muhlenberg's herbarium is merely ticketed " Deigher walli in 
der Wilternus." Muhlenberg assigns the habitat, " Tiger Valley, 
Pennsylvania ; " but Kin probably obtained his plant in 
Tygart's Valley, Virginia, a secluded vale among the western 
ranges of the Alleghanies (in Randolph County), not far from 
Greenbrier Mountains, and other localities visited by this collector, 
as his tickets prove. Kin cultivated the plant for some 
time at Philadelphia, where it was seen by several botanists, 
and among them by Pursh, who took it for the Mapinia sylvatica 
of Aublet ; a mistake which he did not discover whilst 
writing his Flora in Europe, although he had the cultivated 
Carex Fraseriana before him. We were too late for 
good specimens, but succeeded in obtaining a considerable 
number with the fruit still adherent. The plant grows in 
tufts, after the manner of C. plantaginea ; the evergreen 
leaves are a foot or more in length, and often an inch and a 
half in width, with singularly undulate margins ; the slender 
scapes are naked except towards the root, where they are 
sheathed by the convulate bases of the leaves. To the description 
of the spike, fruit, etc., we have nothing of any consequence 
to add. 
in this region, we may mention Carex fiexuosa, C. plantaginea, C.scabrata, 
C. intumescens, Oxalis Acetosella, Streptopus roseus, Viburnum lantanoides, 
and Platanthera orbiculata in the finest condition, and in greater profusion 
than we ever before met with this, the most striking of North American 
Orchidacece. 
Long before we reached the summit we again met with the 
new Saxifraga, 1 which we had previously gathered on the 
mountains near Jefferson; but we now found it in great 
abundance, both in flower and with mature fruit. It grew in 
the greatest profusion on the dripping face of a rocky precipice 
near our encampment for the night, on the northwestern 
side of the mountain, five or six hundred feet beneath the 
highest summit. The vegetation here is so backward that 
the' Saxifraga leucanthemifolia growing on the brow of this 
precipice was not yet in blossom, and the Saxifraga erosa, 
Pursh in the wet soil at its base was scarcely out of flower, 
while 'at the foot of the mountain it had long since shed its 
seeds. We were therefore enabled to satisfy ourselves that 
S. erosa belongs to the section Hydatica, and that the S. 
Wolleana, Torr. & Gray, from a mountain near Bethlehem 
in Pennsylvania, is only a variety of this species. Pursh 
gathered his plant in Virginia, "out of a run near the road 
from the Sweet Springs to the Union Springs, five miles from 
the former " But if this species be the Piobertsonia micranthifolia 
of 'Haworth's Succulent Plants, as is most probable, 
and consequently the Aulaxis micranthifolia of this author's 
1 Saxifraga Careyana (spec, nov.): folns radica ibus longe pet olat 
glabris (temiibus) ovato-rotundis grosse crenato-dentatis basi truncatis vel 
subcordatis, scapo gracili nudo apice paniculato-cymoso, flonbus effusis, 
pedicillis filiformibus, petalis lanceolato-oblongis sessilibus sepala recurva 
plus duplo supcrautibus, carpellis discretis turgidis demum divancatis 
calyce llberis. Variat 1, scapo petiolisque glabriusculis : 2 scapo pedicillis 
nee non pagina foliorum pilis viscosis pubescentibus : 3, scapo folns 
aut bracteis foliaceis 1-2 instructo : 4, foliis ovalibus oblongisve, nunc 
argute dentatis, in petiolum plus minus attenuatis. 
Creseit in rupibus humidis opacis altissimorum montium comitatus 
Ashe, pra?sertim ad montem Grandfather dictum, alt. 3500-6000 pedes: 
Junio floret. Herba spithama?a, rarius pedalis. Flores parvi letala 
consimilia, sessilia, subtriplinervia, alba, immaculata. l.lamenta subulato-filiformis. 
Carpella ovoidea, stylis brevibus apiculata, (stigmatibus 
subincrassatis,) basi vix aut ne vix coalita ad maturitatem per totam 
suturam ventralem dehiscentia, ut in pieris Saxifragis plus minus apocarpeis. 
Semina ovalia, striis elevatis denticulate (per lentem augentem) 
longitudinaliter notata. Species distinctissima, liabitu ad sect. Hydahcam, 
sed characteribus ad Micrantheum accedens. 
subsequent " Enumeration of Saxifragaceous Plants," it must 
have been introduced into the English gardens by Fraser as 
early as 1810. x We know not how such a common plant could 
have escaped the notice of Michaux. Under the name of 
Lettuce the leaves are eaten by the inhabitants as a salad. 
At this same place we also saw an Umbelliferous plant not 
yet in flower, which we believe to be Conioselinum Canadense, 
Torr. & Gr. (Selinum Canadense, Michx.), a very rare 
plant in the extreme northern States and Canada, to wliich 
we had supposed it exclusively confined. We found plenty 
of Cimicifuga, Americana, Michx., but were obliged to content 
ourselves with specimens not yet in flower, and with 
vestiges of the last year's fruit. It should be collected in 
September. 
We were also too early in the season for Chelone Lyoni, 
Pursh, which we found in abundance between the precipice 
mentioned above and the summit of the mountain, with the 
flower-buds just beginning to appear. Mr. Curtis remarks 
that Mr. Nuttall could not have met with this exclusively 
mountain flower near Wilmington ; and also, that the C. 
Lyoni of Pursh and the C. latifolia of Muhlenberg and 
Elliott, are doubtless founded upon one and the same species. 
Both, indeed, are said to have been collected by Lyon, and the 
leaves vary from ovate-lanceolate or oval with an acute base, 
to ovate with a rounded but scarcely cordate base. Pursh's 
character is drawn from a cultivated specimen. Here we 
again met with the Aconitum previously observed in similar 
situations on the Negro Mountain, and which, being then only 
in bud, we took for the A. uncinatum, a species collected in 
this region by Michaux, and recently by Mr. Curtis and other 
botanists. We were greatly surprised, therefore, to find that 
1 The only important discrepancy respects Haworth's character, " Corolla 
irregularis, petalis 2 inferioribus elongatis divaricantibus gracilioribus," 
and " Flores albi, rubro minute punctati " ; while the petals in our 
plant are very nearly equal and similar, aud pure white, except the yellow 
spot at the base. Aulaxis nuda, Haworth, I. c. (of unknown origin), appears 
to be the more ordinary and nearly glabrous form of this species. 
Mr. Don's description of S. erosa, probably drawn from the cultivated 
plant, also differs from our plant in several minor points. 
our plant, here just coming into blossom, had cream-colored 
flowers, very different from those of A. uncinatum, and more 
nearly resembling those of A. LycoctonumA On our return 
to Jefferson, we obtained good specimens at our original 
locality, where it is very abundant. The weak stems at first 
ascending, become prostrate when the plant is in flower, and 
frequently attain the length of seven or eight feet. As the 
stem does not climb, and its flowers are so different from 
those of A. uncinatum, it can hardly be the plant mentioned 
by Pursh under that species, which he saw at the foot of the 
Peaks of Otter and about the Sweet Springs in Virginia. It 
may be remarked that the ovaries of A. uncinatum are often 
nearly glabrous, and the claws of the petals entirely so. The 
seeds are strongly plicate-rugose, with a wing-like margin on 
one side. 
Near the summit of the mountain we saw immense quantities 
of a low but very large-leaved Solidago, not yet in flower, 
which I take to be the S. glomerata of Michaux, who could 
not have failed to observe such a conspicuous and abundant 
plant, especially as it must have been in full blossom at the 
1 Aconitum reclinatum (spec. nov. § Lycoctonum) : caule elongate 
decumhente foliisque palmatifidis glabris, lobis divaricatis cuneatis apicem 
versus incisis, racemis paniculisve divergentibus laxifloris (floribus albidis), 
bracteolis minimis, galea horizontali eonico-cylindracea ore obliquo, 
labio cucullorum obcordato ab ungue distante, calcare adunco, filamentis 
edentulis, carpellis glabris 2-4-spermis, seminibus (immaturis) squamosorugosis. 

Hab. in opacissimis sylvis ad montes Negro Mountain et Grandfather 
dietos, alt. 4000-5000 pedes. Julio-Augusto floret. Caulis flaccidus, 
adscendens vel declinatus, denique procumbens, 3-8 pedalis, ramis gracilibus, 
seu paniculis laxifloris, divaricatis. Folia flaccida ; inferiora longe 
petiolata (circumscriptione suborbiculari), profunde 5-7 fida ; segmentis 
interdum 2-3 lobatis apice incisodentatis dentibus mucronatis; summa 
subsessilia, 3-5 partita ; venis et pagina quandoque superiori tenuissime 
pubescentibus. Pedicelli sparsi (pedunculique puberuli) flore 
longiores, bracteolis 2-3 minimis stipati. Flores minores quam in A. 
Lycoctono, albi vix flavidis tincti (in siecis leviter purpurascentes) ; sepalis 
intus pilis aureis barbatis. Galea primum adscendens, mox horizontalis, 
rostello brevi ractiusculo. Unguis petalorum medium cueulli adfixus ; 
saccus angustus, ore valde obliquo in labium obcordatum expanso. 
Ovaria tria, 4-6-ovulata. 
time he ascended this mountain. It does not, however, altogether 
accord with Michaux's description, nor does that 
author notice the size of the heads, which in our plant are 
among the largest of the genus. Specimens in flower were 
procured by Mr. Curtis, who visited this mountain at a more 
favorable season. With the latter we found a Geum, which 
Mr. Curtis had formerly observed on the Roan Mountain 
(where we afterwards met with it in great abundance), and referred, 
I think correctly, to G. geniculatum, Michx., although 
that species is said to have been collected in Canada. 
The lower portion of the style is less hairy in our specimens 
than in Michaux's plant, a difference which, if constant, 
is not perhaps of specific importance. In the subjoined 
character I have supplied an inadvertent omission in the 
" Flora of North America," where the sessile head of carpels, 
which, so readily distinguishes this species from G. rivale, is 
not mentioned. 1 Here we again found Vaccinium erythrocarpum, 
as already mentioned ; and obtained beautiful floweringspecimens 
of Menziesia globularis, a straggling shrub which 
in this place attains the height of five or six feet. 
1 Geum geniculatum (Michx.) : capitulo carpellorum sessili, articulo styli 
superiore plumoso inferiorem pubescentem excedente, achenio hirsuto 
petalis euneato-obovatis (nunc emarginatis aut leviter obcordatis) exunguiculatis 
calycem a?quantibus; floribus mox ereetis. 
/3 Macreanum, articulo styli inferiore sursum glabrescente. G. Macreanum, 
M. A. Curtis, in litt. 
Creseit in Canada ex Michaux : an recte ? Var. /? in umbrosis ad 
montes Grandfather et Roan, Carolina? Septentrionalis, alt. 5500-6000 
pedes, übi imprimis detexit cl. Curtis. Julio floret. Caulis 2-3-pedalis, 
gracilis, foliosus, inferne pilis rigidiusculis retrorsis, superne pilis mollibus 
patentibus erebrioribus villosus. Folia membranacea ; radicalia nunc 
palmatim 3-secta, nunc interrupte pinnatiseeta, haiid rariusque indivisa 
vel sublobata in eodem stirpe ; caulinia trisecta trilobatave, lobis acutis ; 
superiora sessilia. Flores minores et numerosiores quam in 67. rivali ; 
petala albida, venis purpurascentibus. Styli pars inferior portione plumosa 
primum multo, postremum modice brevior, in exemplo Michx. 
manifeste, at juxta apicem parce piloso-pubescens ; in var. /3 superne 
glabrata. 
Should the Carolina plant hereafter prove to be a distinct species, it 
will of course retain the name proposed by Mr. Curtis, in honor of his 
friend and former associate in botanical labors, Dr. James F. Mcßee of 
Wilmington, North Carolina. 
The only unwooded portion of the ridge which we ascended, 
an exposed rock a few yards in extent, presents a truly Alpine 
aspect, being clothed with lichens and mosses, and with a 
dense mat of the mountain Leiophyllum, a stunted and much 
branched shrub (five to ten inches high), with small coriaceous 
leaves greatly resembling Azalea procumbensP The 
much denser growth, and the broader, more petiolate, and 
perhaps uniformly opposite leaves, as well as the very different 
habitat, would seem to distinguish the mountain plant 
from the L. buxifolium of the Pine Barrens of New Jersey, 
etc. ; but although I think the learned De Candolle has correctl'v 
separated the former, under the name of L. serpyllifolium 
(Ledum serpyllifolium, L'Her. ined.), it is not easy to 
find sufficient and entirely constant distinctive characters; 
since the sparse scabrous puburluence of the capsule may also 
be observed upon the ovary of the low-country plant, m which 
the leaves are likewise not unfrequently opposite; and no 
reliance can be placed on the length of the pedicels. The 
synonymy requires some correction ; the Ledum buxifohum 
of Michaux (" in summis montibus excelsis Carolina;"), and 
of Nuttall, so far as respects the plant which " is extremely 
abundant on the highest summits of the Catawba Ridge," (that 
is, on Table Mountain,) as well as the Leiophyllum buxifolium 
of Elliott (from the mountains of Greenville district, South 
Carolina), must be referred to L. serpyllifolium, DC. We 
were too late to obtain the plant in blossom, excepting one 
or two straggling specimens ; but we were so fortunate as to 
obtain a few flowering specimens of Rhododendron Cataw- 
biense. 
I should have remarked, that so much time was occupied in 
the ascent of this mountain as nearly to prevent us from herborizing 
around the summit for that day; since we had to 
descend some distance to the nearest spring of water, and prepare 
our encampment for the night. The branches of the 
1 We are confident that the latter does not grow on the Grandfather 
Mountain, as is stated by Pursh, on the authority of a specimen collected 
by Lyon ; and have little doubt that he mistook for it this species of 
Leiophyllum. Vide Pursh, " Flora Amer. Sept." i. pp. 154, 301. 
Balsam afforded excellent materials for the construction of 
our lodge ; the smaller twigs with large mats of moss stripped 
from the rocks furnished our bed, and the dead trees supplied 
us with fuel for cooking our supper and for the large fire we 
were obliged to keep up during the night. We re-ascended 
the summit the next morning, and devoted several hours to 
its examination ; but the threatening state of the weather prevented 
us from visiting the adjacent ridges, or the southern 
and eastern faces of the mountain, and we were constrained 
to descend towards evening to the humble dwelling of our 
guide, which we reached before the impending storm commenced. 

Our next excursion was to the Roan Mountain, a portion 
of the elevated range which forms the boundary between 
North Carolina and Tennessee, distant nearly thirty miles 
southwest from our quarters at the foot of Grandfather by 
the most direct path, but at least sixty by the nearest carriage 
road. We traveled for the most part on foot, loading 
the horses with our portfolios, paper, and some necessary luggage, 
crossed the Hanging-rock Mountain to Elk Creek, and 
thence over a steep ridge to Cranberry Forge, on the sources 
of Doe River, where we passed the night. On our way we 
cut down a Service-tree (as the Amelanchier Canadensis is 
here called), and feasted upon the ripe fruit, which throughout 
this region is highly, and indeed justly prized, being 
sweet with a very agreeable flavor ; while in the northern 
States, so far as our experience goes, this fruit, even if it 
may be said to be edible, is not worth eating. As " Sarvices " 
are here greedily sought after, and are generally procured by 
cutting down the trees, the latter are becoming scarce in the 
vicinity of the " plantations," as the mountain settlements are 
universally called. Along the streams we met with the mountain 
species of Andromeda (Leucothoe), doubtless Pursh's 
A. axillaris ; but whether the original A. axillaris of the 
" Hortus Kewensis " pertains to this or to the species of the 
low country, I cannot at this moment ascertain. A portion 
of Pursh's character seems also to belong to the low country 
rather than to the mountain species, and the two are by no 
means clearly distinguished in subsequent works. The leaves 
in our specimens are oblong-lanceolate, finely acuminate, the 
margins closely beset throughout with spinulose - setaceous 
teeth ; and the rather loose spicate racemes (the corolla having 
fallen) are nearly half the length of the leaves. 
Hitherto we had searched in vain for the Astilbe decandra; 
but we first met with this very interesting plant in the rich 
and moist mountain woods between Elk Creek and Cranberry 
Forge, and subsequently in similar situations, particularly 
along the steep banks of streams, quite to the base of the 
Roan. Mr. Curtis found it abundantly near the sources of 
the Linville River, and at the North Cove, where it could not 
have escaped the notice of Michaux ; and it is doubtless the 
Spiraea Aruncus var. hermaphrodita of that author. It indeed 
o-reatly resembles Spiraea Aruncus, and at a distance of 
a few yards is not easily distinguished from that plant, but on 
a closer approach the resemblance is much less striking. 
Michaux appears to have been the original discoverer of this 
plant, and from him the specimens cultivated in the Malmaison 
Garden, and described by Ventenat under the name of 
Tiarella biternata, were probably derived. It was afterwards 
collected by Lyon, 1 and described by Pursh from a specimen 
cultivated in Mr Lambert's garden at Boynton. We noticed 
a peculiarity in this plant, which explains the discrepancy between 
Ventenat and Pursh (the former having figured it with 
linear-spatulate petals, while the latter found it apetalous), 
and perhaps throws some additional light upon the genus. 
The flowers are dicecio-polygamous, the two forms differing 
from each other in aspect much as the staminate and pistillate 
plants of Spiraea Aruncus. In one form, the filaments are 
exserted to twice or thrice the length of the calyx, and the 
spatulate-linear petals, inconspicuous only on account of their 
narrowness, are nearly as long as the stamens ; the ovaries 
1 Muhlenberg's specimen was also received from Lyon. The only 
habitat cited in this author's catalogue is Tennessee, and we ourselves 
collected it within the limits, as well as on the borders of that State. The 
late Dr. Mcbride found it in South Carolina, near the sources of the 
Saluda. 
are well formed and filled with ovules, which, however, so far 
as I have observed, are never fertilized ; and the stigmas are 
smaller than in the fertile plant, and not papillose. In the 
other or fertile form, both the stamens and the petals are in 
an abortive or rudimentary state, and being shorter than the 
sepals, and concealed by them in dried specimens, are readily 
overlooked ; the stigmas are large, truncate, and papillose, 
and a portion of the ovules become fertile. The Japanese 
species (Iloteia Japonica, Morr. & Decaisne, the Spiraea 
Aruncus of Thunberg) appears to have uniform and perfect 
flowers p but the species from Nepal (Astilbe rivularis, Don, 
the Spiraea barbata of Wallich, but not of Lindley) is probably 
polygamo-dicecious, like our own species ; at least, the 
flowers are apetalous in a fragment given me by Professor 
Royle, and the stamens mostly equal in number to the sepals. 
I have no doubt that these three species belong to a single 
and very natural genus, for which the name of Astilbe must 
be retained ; for I see neither justice nor reason in superseding 
the prior name, as suggested by Endlicher, 2 on account of 
the incompleteness of the character, which correctly describes 
one state, at least, of the plant intended, by the subsequent 
Hoteia, the character of which is equally incomplete, when 
applied to the whole genus. The number of genera which 
are either divided between North America, Japan, and the 
mountain region of central Asia, or have nearly allied species 
in these countries or in the two former, is very considerable : 
in other cases a North American genus is replaced by a 
nearly allied one in Japan, etc., as Decumaria by Schizophragma, 
Schizandra by Sphserostemma, Hamamelis by Corylopsis, 
etc. I have elsewhere alluded to this subject and shall 
probably consider it more particularly on some future occasion. 
Our next day's journey was from Cranberry Forge to Crab 
i " Flores in meo Japonieo specimine omnes inveni hermaphrodites, 
nee ullos polygamos." (Thunberg, " Flora Japonica," p. 212, sub Spiraea 
AruncoS) 
2 " Si, quod nunc asserunt auctores, Hoteia et Astilbe, Don, revera 
planta? congeneres, posterius incomplete ad auctore suo descriptum supprimendum, 
et prius egregie stabilitum servandum erit." (Endlicher, 
"Genera," Suppl. p. 1416.) 
Orchard on Doe River, in Tennessee, and up Little Doe 
River to Squire Hampton's, where we took a guide and ascended 
the Roan. While ascending the Little Doe River, 
about three miles from the junction with the large stream of 
that name, at one of the numerous places where the road 
crosses this rivulet, we again met with Carex Fraseriana. 
The plant did not appear to be so abundant in this Tennessee 
locality as at the Grandfather, but it is doubtless plentiful on 
the mountain side just above. We ascended the north side 
of the Roan, through the heavy timbered woods and rank 
herbage with which it is covered ; but found nothing new to 
us excepting Streptopus lanuginosus, in fruit, and among the 
grove of Rhododendron maximum towards the summit, we 
also collected Diphyscium foliosum, a moss which we had 
not before seen in a living state. In more open moist places 
near the summit, we found the Hedyotis (Houstonia) serpyllifolia, 
still beautifully in flower, and the Geum geniculatum, 
which we have already noticed. It was just sunset when we 
reached the bald and grassy summit of this noble mountain, 
and after enjoying for a moment the magnificent view it affords, 
had barely time to prepare our encampment between 
two dense clumps of Rhododendron Catawbien.se, to collect 
fuel, and make ready our supper. The night was so fine 
that our slight shelter of Balsam boughs proved amply sufficient 
; the thermometer, at this elevation of about six thousand 
feet above the level of the sea, being 64° Fahr. at midnight, 
and 60° at sunrise. The temperature of a spring just 
under the brow of the mountain below our encampment we 
found to be 47° Fahr. The Roan is well characterized by 
Professor Mitchell as the easiest of access and the most beautiful 
of all the high mountains of that region. " With the 
exception of a body of (granitic) rocks, looking like the ruins 
of an old castle, near its southwestern extremity, the top of 
the Roan may be described as a vast meadow (about nine 
miles, in length, with some interruptions, and with a maximum 
elevation of six thousand and thirty-eight feet), without a 
tree to obstruct the prospect ; where a person may gallop his 
horse for a mile or two, with Carolina at his feet on one side, 
and Tennessee on the other, with a great ocean of mountain 
raised into tremendous billows immediately about him. It is 
the pasture ground for the young horses of the whole country 
about it during the summer. We found the strawberry here 
in the greatest abundance and of the finest quality, in regard 
to both size and flavor, on the 30th of July." l 
At sunrise we had fine weather and a most extensive view 
of the surrounding country. In one direction we could count 
from eight to twelve successive ranges of mountains, and 
nearly all the higher peaks of this whole region were distinctly 
visible. Soon, however, we were enveloped in a dense 
fog which continued for several hours, during which time 
we traversed the southwestern summit and made a list of 
the plants we saw. The herbaceous plants of this bald and 
rounded summit are chiefly Aira flexuosa, Juncus tenuis, 
Carex intumescens, festucacea, aestivalis of Mr. Curtis, and a 
narrow-leaved variety of C. Pennsylvanica, the latter constituting 
the greater part of the grassy herbage, Luzula campestris, 
Lilium Philadelphicum and Canadense, which here 
only attain the height of from four to eight inches, Sisyrinchium 
anceps, Smilacina bifolia, Habenaria (Platanthera) 
peramcena, Veratrum viride, Helonias ( Chamatilirium) dioica, 
Osmunda Claytoniana, Linn. (0. interrupta, Michx.), 
Athyrium asplenioides, Pedicularis Canadensis, mostly with 
purplish-brown flowers, now just in blossom, Trautvetteria 
palmata, Ranunculus repens, Thalictrum dioicum just in 
flower, Geum radiatum in the greatest profusion (it was 
here that Michaux obtained this species), Potentilla tridentata 
and Canadensis, Frag aria Virginiana, the fruit just 
ripe and of the finest flavor, Rubus villosus now in flower, 
Castilleja coccinea, Geranium maculatum, Clematis Viorna 
about eight inches high, Sanicula Marilandica, Zizia aurea, 
Heracleum lanatum, PPypericum corymbosum, with larger 
flowers than usual, a more upright and larger-leaved variety 
of PPedyotis serpyllifolia, (Enorthera glauca fi, Senecio 
1 Professor Mitchell of the Chapel Hill University, in the " Raleigh 
Register " of November 3, 1835, and in the " American Journal of 
Science and Arts " for January, 1839. 
Balsamitce, Rudbeclcia triloba, and a dwarf variety of R. 
laciniata, Liatris spicata, Cacalia atriplicifolia, Cynthia 
Virginica, Aster acuminatum, Solidago bicolor, S. spithamea, 
(Curtis in Torr. & Gray, Fl. hied.,) a very distinct 
dwarf species, 8. Curtisii, Torr & Gr. I. c, not yet in flower, 
and 8. glomerata in the same state as at Grandfather Mountain 
; also Saxifraga leucanthemifolia, Sedum telephioides, 
Heuchera villosa, Polypoalium vulgare, the dwarf variety of 
Hedyotis purpurea previously noticed, Scirpus cczspitosus, 
and Agrostis rupestris ! which are confined to the rocky precipice 
already mentioned. The only tree is Abies Fraseri, 
a few dwarf specimens of which extend into the open ground 
of the summit ; and the following are all the shrubs which 
we observed, namely, Diervilla triflda, Menziesia globularis, 
Vaccinium erythocarpum, Rhododendron Catawbiense, 
formino- very dense clumps, Podophyllum serpyllifolium, Sorbus 
Americana, two to four feet high, Crataegus punctata 
only a foot in height, Pyrus arbutifolia var. mclanocarpa, 
Ribes rotundifolium ; and a low and much branched species 
of Alder, which Mr. Curtis proposes to call Alnus Mitchelliana, 
in honor of Professor Mitchell ; but we fear it may 
prove to be a variety of what we deem the A. crispa, Ait. 
from the mountains of New York, New Hampshire, etc., and 
Newfoundland, although it has more rounded leaves with the 
lower surface nearly glabrous, except the primary veins ; while 
in the former (to which the names of A. crispa and J., undulata 
are not very appropriate), the leaves are often, but not 
always, somewhat velvety-pubescent beneath. To our list 
must be added any apparently undescribed species of Vaccinium, 
first noticed by Mr. Constable. 1 We made a hasty 
1 Vaccinium Constablcei (spec, nov.) : pumilum, foliis deciduis ovalibus 
pallidis subtus glaucis retieulato-venosisque glanduloso-mucronatis 
integerrimis vel obsoletissime serrulatis ciliatis, raeemis brevissimis sessilibus, 
bracteis squamaceis parvis caducis, corollis brevissime cylindricis, 
antheris inclusis muticis, ovariis 10-locularibus, loculis pluri-ovulatis. 
In summo jugo " Roan Mountain " dicto (Tennessee et Carolina Septentrionali), 
ad alt. 6000 pedes. Julio floret. — Frutex 1-3-pedalis, 
erectus, ramis griseo-viridibus teretis. Folia sesqui-biuncialia, lato-ovalia 
vel elliptica, utrinque sa?pius acuta, glabra, nisi costa supra puberula 
visit to the other principal summit, where we found nothing 
that we had not already collected, excepting Arenaria glabra, 
Michx., and descended partly by way of the contiguous Yellow 
Mountain. 
Retracing our steps, we returned the next day to the foot 
of Grandfather, and reached our quarters at Jefferson the 
second day after. We had frequently been told of an antidote 
to the bite of the Rattlesnake and Copperhead (not unfrequent 
throughout this region), which is thought to possess 
wonderful efficacy, called Thurman's Snake-root after an " Indian 
Doctor," who first employed it ; the plant was brought to 
us by a man who was ready to attest its virtues from his personal 
knowledge, and proved to be the Silene stellata I Its use 
was suggested by the markings of the root beneath the bark, 
in which these people find a fancied resemblance to the skin 
of the Rattlesnake. Nearly all the reputed antidotes are 
equally inert ; such herbs as Pmpatiens pallida, etc., being 
sometimes employed ; so that we are led to conclude that the 
bite of these reptiles is seldom fatal, or even very dangerous, 
in these cooler portions of the country. 
About the foot of the Roan and Grandfather we obtained 
et margines ciliati, subsessilia, infra saturate glauca. Racemi 5-10-flori, 
SEepe corymbosi, ad apicem ramulorum anni prascedentis solitarii vel 
aggregati. Bacca? immatura? ea?rulea?, glauca?, limbo calycis majuseulo 
coronata?, decern- (nunc abortu quinque ?) loculares ; loculis pleio (3-6 ?) 
spermis. 
Brofessor Dunal (in DC. Prodr. 7, p. 566) notices as an extraordinary 
exception to the character of Vaccinium, a species with an 8-10-celled fruit 
and a single (?) seed in each cell. The first-named character is not unfrequent 
in the genus : several of the more common species which I have 
cursorily examined, exhibit a more or less completely 8-10-celled ovary, 
but with many ovules in each cell. There is a small group, however 
\Decachcena, Torr. & Gray ined.], presenting a different structure, which 
is best exemplified in V. resinosum, Ait. The 10 carpels of this species, 
inclosed in the baccate calyx, are very slightly coherent with each other, 
and become crustaceous or bony nuts, each containing a single ascending 
seed. The same is the case in what I take to be V. dumosum and V. Mrtellum; 
and probably in some other species which have the leaves 
sprinkled with resinous dots. V. frondosum, Willd. (which is the V. decamerocarpon 
of Dunal), is similar in structure, except that the carpels 
appear to be more coherent and less indurated. 
a few specimens of Pycnanthemum montanum, Michx. (Monardella, 
Benth.) just coming into blossom. Our plant accords 
with Michaux's description, except that there are frequently 
two or even three axillary heads besides the terminal 
one. The flowers have altogether the structure of Pycnanthemum, 
and the upper lip of the corolla is entire ; so that it 
cannot belong to Monardella, although placed as the leading 
species of that genus. As to the species from which Mr. Bentham 
derived the generic name (Pycnanthemum Monardella, 
Michx.), I am by no means certain that it belongs either to 
Pycnanthemum or Monardella. The specimen in the Michauxian 
herbarium is not out of flower, as has been thought, 
but the inflorescence is undeveloped, and perhaps in an abnormal 
state. In examining a small portion taken from the head, 
I found nothing but striate-nerved bracts, obtuse and villous 
at the apex, and abruptly awned ; the exterior involucrate 
and often lobed ; the innermost linear, and tipped with a single 
awn. The aspect of the plant, also, is so like Monarda 
flstulosa, that I am strongly inclined to think it a somewhat 
monstrous state of that, or some nearly allied species ; in 
which case, the genus Monardella should be restricted to the 
Californian species. Pursh's P. Monardella, I may observe, 
was collected beneath the Natural Bridge in Virginia, where 
we also obtained the plant, and subsequently met with it 
throughout the mountains. It is certainly a form of Monarda 
flstulosa, according to Bentham's characters, but the taste is 
much less pungent, the throat of the calyx less strongly 
bearded than is usual in that species, and the corolla nearly 
white. We thought it probably a distinct species ; but these 
differences may be owing to the deep shade in which it commonly 
occurs. The P. Monardella of Elliott, according to 
his herbarium, is identical with that of Pursh. We collected 
in Ashe County several other species of Pycnanthemum, and 
in the endeavor to discriminate them, we encountered so 
many difficulties that I am induced to give a revision of the 
whole genus. 
Some additional plants were obtained around Jefferson 
which were not previously in blossom, such as Campanula 
divaricata ; Cacalia reniformis ; Sliphium perfoliatum ; the 
larger form oiCoreopsis auriculata, with nearly all the leaves 
undivided ; the glabrous and narrow-leaved variety of C. senifolia 
(C. stellata, Nutt.) which alone occurs in this region; 
Melanthium Virginicum, which is a very handsome plant, with 
the flowers cream-colored when they first expand ; and Stenanthium 
angustifolium, Gray, which is doubtless the Plelonias 
graminea of the " Botanical Magazine." We also made an 
excursion to the White Top in Virginia, twenty miles northwest 
from Jefferson ; a mountain of the same character as the 
Roan, but on a smaller scale, and with the pasturage of its 
summit more closely fed. We were not rewarded, however, 
with any new plants, and the cloudy weather obscured the 
prospect, which is said to be very extensive. On our return, 
we found Cedronella cordata, Benth., nearly out of flower, 
with runners often two or three feet in length. Mr. Bentham 
has omitted to mention the agreeable balsamic odor of the 
genus, which in our plant is much less powerful than in C. 
triphylla. We saw plenty of Cimicifuga Americana, but 
the flowers were still unexpanded. Our endeavors to obtain 
the fruit of Cimicifuga cordifolia (common in this region) 
were likewise unsuccessful ; without which it is not always 
easy to distinguish this species from C. racemosa. The leaflets 
of the former are frequently very large, the terminal ones 
resembling the leaves of the Vine in size and shape, as remarked 
by De Candolle ; in one instance we found them ten 
inches in diameter ; but they are generally much smaller and 
more divided, apparently passing into the former species. 
The number of the ovaries does not afford marked characters, 
since the lowest flowers of C. racemosa sometimes present 
two, while the upper ones of C. cordifolia are almost always 
monogynous. 
We were too early in the season for several interesting 
plants, especially Compositce, and did not extend our researches 
far enough south to obtain many others ; such as 
Hudsonia montana, which appears to be confined to Table 
Mountain, Rhododendron punctatum, Stuartia pentagyna, 
Philadelphus hirsutus, Silene ovata (which Mr. Curtis found 
BOTANICAL EXCURSION TO NORTH CAROLINA. 69 
in Buncombe and Haywood counties), Berberis Canadensis 
(which, however, Pursh collected on the mountains of Greenbrier 
in Virginia), Parnassia asarifolia (which according 
to Mr. Curtis first appears in Yancey County, but Pursh 
procured it from " mountain runs on the Salt Pond Mountain, 
Virginia, and on the top of the Alleghanies near Christianburg 
"), and, above all, the new Thermopsis; (T Caroliniana, 
M. A. Curtis, MSS.) recently discovered by our friend Mr. 
Curtis, in Haywood and Cherokee counties. We were likewise 
unsuccessful in our search for a remarkable undescribed 
plant, with a habit of Pyrola and the foliage of Galax, which 
was obtained by Michaux in the high mountains of Carolina. 
The only specimen extant is among the " Plantaa incognito " 
of the Michauxian herbarium, in fruit only; and we were 
anxious to obtain flowering specimens, that we might complete 
its history ; as I have long wished to dedicate the plant to 
Professor Short of Kentucky, whose attainments and eminent 
services in North American botany are well known and 
appreciated both at home and abroad. 1 
We left this interesting region near the end of July, returning 
to New York by way of Raleigh, Richmond, etc. ; and 
found a marked change in the vegetation immediately on 
crossing the Blue Ridge. I cannot extend these remarks to 
the plants observed in our homeward journey, except to mention 
that the Schrankia of this part of the country, which extends 
to the eastern slope of the Blue Ridge, is the S. angustata, 
Torr. & Gray ; at least we observed no other species. 
1 Shortia, Torrey & Gray. Calyx quinquesepalus ; sepala imbricata, 
squamacea, striata, persistentia, exteriora ovata, interiora oblonga. 
Corolla— Stamina— Capsula calyce brevior, subglobosa, stylo filiformi 
(subpersistente) superata, trilocularis, loeulicide trivalvis, valvis medio 
septiferis placenta centrali magna persistente. Semina multa, parva ; 
testa nucleo conformis. Embryo teres, rectiusculus, albumine brevior. 
Herba ca?spitosa ? subaculis, perenni, glabra ; foliis longe petiolatis, 
rotundatis, subcordatis, apice nunc retusis, crenato-serratis, erenaturis 
mucronatis ; scapis unifloris, nudis, apicem versus squamoso-bracteatis. 
S. galacifolia, Torrey & Gray. (V. spec. siec. in herb. Michx., cum 
sehedula, « Hautes montagnes de Carolinie. An Pyrola spec. ? an genus 
novum ? ") 
This is doubtless the 8. uncinata of De Candolle ; but not, I 
think, of Willdenow. I may here remark, that the reticulateleaved 
species (8. uncinata, Torr. & Gr.) is the Leptoglottis 
of De Candolle (" Mem Legum "), as I have ascertained from 
a fragment of the original specimen in the rich herbarium of 
Mr. Webb, which that gentleman obligingly sent me ; but I 
find no neutral flowers or sterile filaments in the numerous 
specimens of this plant, from different localities, which I have 
from time to time examined. 
V 
THE LONGEVITY OF TREES. 
The " Histoire des Arbres Forestieres de I'Amerique Septentrionale 
1 of the younger Michaux is chiefly known in 
this country through the English translation made by Mr. 
Hillhouse, under the superintendence of the author, who 
added some new plates, and information not contained in the 
French edition. It was published in Paris in the year 1819. 
We have no intention of formally reviewing, at this late day 
a work of such long-established reputation as the Sylva of 
Michaux. It has been the standard treatise upon the subject 
ever since its publication ; and it well deserves the rank it 
holds. We wish rather to offer our grateful acknowledgments 
to the memory of the late Mr. William Maclure for 
his liberal endeavors to render this important and quite expensive 
work more generally accessible in the country the 
noble forests of which it is designed to illustrate. In furtherance 
of this object, Mr. Maclure, if we are rightly informed, 
purchased in Paris the copies which remained unsold 
the year after its publication, and sold them in the United 
States at a very reduced price. With liberal forethought, 
he bought also the original copperplates of this book, and of 
several other expensive works of science and art; intending 
to have them reprinted in this country in a cheaper form, so 
as to insure them a wider circulation.* During the last twelve 
years of his life, or from the time of the total failure of the 
" great social experiment" made at New Harmony, Indiana, by 
the celebrated Robert Owen and himself, down to his decease 
in 1840, Mr. Maclure resided in the city of Mexico. The 
1 « North American Review," July, 1844. «™«t*s«. 
' Among these are the complete copperplates of Xillot's " ILstoire 
Naturelle des Oiseaux de I'Amerique Septentrional a , and Audebert s 
" Histoire Naturelle des Oiseaux," 
great interest which he still felt in the advancement and diffusion 
of scientific knowledge in this country, was manifested 
by his continued and munificent benefactions to the Academy 
of Natural Sciences at Philadelphia. 1 It was his desire also 
that some competent person, at his expense,, should collect 
additional information respecting the forest trees of North 
America, and prepare a new and augmented edition of 
Michaux's Sylva. Although this generous plan was not carried 
into execution in Mr. Maclure' 3 lifetime, we understand 
that he left testamentary instructions for its accomplishment, 
or at least for the reprint of Michaux's original work. 
Mr. Maclure's munificent intentions are — fulfilled, shall 
we say ? by the edition now before us, printed at New Harmony, 
Indiana, upon wretched, flimsy,, whity-brown paper, of 
texture scarcely firm enough to receive the impression of the 
worn-out type, which seems to have done long service in the 
columns of some country newspaper. The engravings, to do 
the work full justice, are very good, at least in the colored 
copies ; being impressions from the original plates imported 
by Mr. Maclure, and colored after the French edition. The 
subscription price was high enough to pay for the best typography 
and paper ; and so popular a work would surely have 
found a ready sale at any reasonable price, as the Paris edition 
had been long out of print. We are bound to suppose 
that the testamentary instructions of the late Mr. Maclure 
have been literally fulfilled. How far his generous intentions 
have been answered, or to what extent defeated, by the 
wretched character of the reprint, are questions which we 
shall not attempt to answer, except by stating that, far from 
having obtained the wide circulation which Mr. Maclure 
desired, these volumes have entirely disappeared from the 
shelves of our booksellers, where, so far as we can learn, 
! Besides his invaluable library of nearly 4000 volumes, containing 
the choicest works in natural history, antiquities, the fine arts, voyages 
and travels, etc., and many smaller contributions to this flourishing institution, 
of which he was president for more than twenty years, Mr. Maclure 
presented to it, in the latter part of his life, the sum of twenty 
thousand dollars. See Dr. Morton's " Memoir of William Maclure," 
Philadelphia, 1841. <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:51:33 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

from New York, across the mountains in Pennsylvania, to the 
Ohio, and carefully explored the States of Kentucky and Tennessee 
; thence, recrossing the mountains in North Carolina to 
Charleston, he again embarked for France. 1 Again returning 
in 1807, he journeyed along the whole extent of our Atlantic 
coast, and visited the principal ports to examine the timber 
employed in shipbuilding and in workshops of every description 
; besides making separate excursions into the interior : 
" the first, along the rivers Kennebec and Sandy, passingthrough 
Hallowell, Norridgewock, and Farming-ton ; the second, 
from Boston to Lake Champlain ; the third, from New 
York to the lakes Ontario and Erie ; the fourth, from Philadelphia 
to the borders of the rivers Monongahela, Alleghany, 
and Ohio; and the fifth, from Charleston to the sources of 
the Savannah and Oconee." Having thus faithfully collected 
the requisite information, his great work upon our forest trees 
— the fruit of so much labor — was published at Paris in 
1810-13. 
But this work is not the only result of the well directed industry 
and zeal of the elder and the younger Michaux. To 
these two persons, chiefly, are the French plantations indebted 
for their surpassingly rich collections of. American trees and 
shrubs ; which long since gave rise to the remark, as true at 
this day as it was twenty years ago, that an American must 
visit France to see the productions of his native forests. 
When shall it be said that the statement is no longer true ? 
When shall we be able to point to a complete, or even a respectable, 
American collection of our indigenous trees and 
shrubs ? 
A few words will suffice for the second work on our list. 2 
1 The observations made in this tour are recorded in his " Voyages a 
I'Ouest de Moots Alleghanys," Bvo, Paris, 1804 ; and in a " Me"moire sur 
la Naturalisation des Arbres Forestieres de I'Ame'rique Septentrionale," 
Bvo, Paris, 1805. 
2 " The North American Sylva " ; or a description of the forest trees 
of the United States, Canada, and Nova Scotia, not described in the work 
of F. Andrew Michaux, and containing all the forest trees discovered in 
the Rocky Mountains, the Territory of Oregon down to the shores of the 
Pacific and into the confines of California, as well as in various parts of 
the United States ; illustrated by 122 fine plates. 
Mr. Nuttall, it appears, first arrived in this country the very 
year that the younger Michaux finally left it. And from that 
time to the present, no botanist has visited so large a portion 
of the United States, or made such an amount of observations 
in the field and forest. Probably few naturalists have 
ever excelled him in aptitude for such observations, in quickness 
of eye, tact in discrimination, and tenacity of memory. 
In some of these respects, perhaps, he may have been equalled 
by Rafinesque, — and there are obvious points of resemblance 
between the later writings of the two, which might tempt us 
to continue the parallel ; — but in scientific knowledge and 
judgment he was always greatly superior to that eccentric 
individual. Mr. Nuttall has also enjoyed the best opportunities 
for exploring the wide regions beyond the Mississippi. 
In 1811, along with Mr. Bradbury, he ascended the Missouri 
to the Mandan villages 1600 miles above its mouth ; and 
shortly after his return published his extended and most happily 
executed botanical work, the " Genera of North American 
Plants." In 1819, at the imminent risk of his life, he 
ascended the Arkansas to the Great Salt River. And, in 
1834, he finally succeeded in crossing the Rocky Mountains 
by the now well-trodden road along the sources of the Platte, 
and exploring the territory of Oregon and of Upper California. 
Mr. Nuttall was therefore peculiarly qualified for 
the preparation of a supplementary North American Sylva, 
designed especially to comprise the forest trees of these wide 
regions, which are now, for obvious reasons, attracting particular 
attention. 
The work, according to the announcement on the title-page, 
"will consist of three volumes ; and we understand that the 
editor committed the whole manuscript to the publisher's 
hands more than two years ago, when he returned to his native 
country, to take possession of an ample family inheritance. 
But from some cause, the publication has been greatly 
delayed ; only one volume having yet appeared, and that in 
two portions, of which the first bears the date of 1842, while 
the second has but just reached us. We postpone all critical 
remarks until the entire publication is completed ; merely ob- 
serving, lest the interests of the publisher should suffer from 
nominal connection between this work and the New Harmony 
reprint of the original Sylva, that the paper and typography 
are good, and the plates, which are colored lithographs, are 
respectable. Meanwhile the interest of the subject, and the 
well-known scientific character of the author, will commend 
the work to general attention and patronage. 
The plan and object of the late Mr. Loudon's greatest 
work, " The Arboretum et Fruticetum Britannicum," is fully 
set forth in the copious title-page. All its promises are more 
than redeemed in the execution of the work, which is truly a 
fine monument of industry and careful research. We have 
particular reasons, which will appear in the sequel, for commending 
this work to the notice of any readers interested in 
these subjects, who do not already possess it. By purchasing 
a copy of it, or of the valuable abridgment, the " Encyclopaedia 
of Trees and Shrubs," a work of moderate price, they 
will render important aid to the embarrassed family of the 
author. To give some idea of the astonishing industry of the 
late Mr. Loudon in the preparation of scientific books, we extract 
the following account from the " Gardeners' Magazine," 
an excellent periodical, the publication of which, after it had 
continued for a period of eighteen years, terminated at the, 
death of its indefatigable editor. 
" Mr. Loudon was brought up as a landscape-gardener, and 
began to practise in 1808, when he came to England with 
numerous letters of introduction to some of the first landed 
proprietors in the kingdom. He afterwards took a large farm 
in Oxfordshire, where he resided in 1809. In the years 1813, 
1814, 1815, he made the tour of northern Europe, traversing 
Sweden, Russia, Poland, and Austria ; in 1819, he traveled 
through Italy, and in 1828, through France and Germany. 
Mr. Loudon's career as an author began in 1803, when he 
was only twenty years old ; and it continued, with very little 
interruption, during the space of forty years, being only concluded 
by his death. The first works he published were the 
following: 'Observations on laying out Public Squares,' 
in 1803, and on ' Plantations,' in 1804 ; a ' Treatise on Hot- 
houses,' in 1805, and on ' Country Residences,' in 1806, both 
4to ; ' Hints on the Formation of Gardens,' in 1812 ; and 
three works on 'Hothouses,' in 1817 and 1818. In 1822 appeared 
the first edition of the ' Encyclopaedia of Gardening ' ; 
a work remarkable for the immense mass of useful matter 
which it contained, and for the then unusual circumstance of 
a great quantity of woodcuts being mingled with the text : 
this book obtained an extraordinary sale, and fully established 
his fame as an author. Soon after was published an anonymous 
work, written either partly or entirely by Mr. Loudon, 
called the ' Greenhouse Companion ' ; and shortly afterwards, 
' Observations on laying out Farms,' in folio, with his name. 
In 1824, a second edition of the ' Encyclopaedia of Gardening 
' was published, with very great alterations and improvements 
; and the following year appeared the first edition of 
the ' Encyclopaedia of Agriculture.' In 1826, the ' Gardeners' 
Magazine ' was commenced, being the first periodical ever devoted 
exclusively to horticultural subjects. The ' Magazine 
of Natural History,' also the first of its kind, was begun in 
1828. Mr. Loudon was now occupied in the preparation of 
the ' Encyclopaedia of Plants,' which was published early in 
1829, and was speedily followed by the ' Hortus Britannicus.' 
In 1830, a second and nearly rewritten edition of the ' Encyclopaedia 
of Agriculture ' was published, and this was followed 
by an entirely rewritten edition of the ' Encyclopaedia of 
Gardening,' in 1831 ; and the ' Encyclopaedia of Cottage, 
Farm, and Villa Architecture,' the first he published on his 
own account, in 1832. This last work was one of the most 
successful because it was one of the most useful he ever wrote, 
and it is likely long to continue a standard book on the subject 
of which it treats. Mr. Loudon now began to prepare 
his great and ruinous work, the ' Arboretum Britannicum,' 
the anxieties attendant on which were, undoubtedly, the 
primary cause of that decay of constitution which terminated 
in his death. This work was not, however, completed till 
1838, and in the mean time he began the ' Architectural 
Magazine,' the first periodical devoted exclusively to architecture. 
The labor he underwent at this time is almost in- 
credible. He had four periodicals, namely, the ' Gardeners',' 
' Natural History,' and ' Architectural Magazines,' and the 
' Arboretum Britannicum,' which was published in monthly 
numbers, going on at the same time ; and, to produce these 
at the proper times, he literally worked night and day. Immediately 
on the conclusion of the ' Arboretum Britannicum,' 
he began the ' Suburban Gardener,' which was also published 
in 1838, as was the ' Hortus Lignosus Londinensis ' ; and in 
1839 appeared his edition of Repton's 'Landscape Gardening.' 
In 1840 he accepted the editorship of the ' Gardeners' 
Gazette,' which he retained till November, 1841 ; and in 1842 
he published his ' Encyclopaedia of Trees and Shrubs.' In 
the same year he completed his ' Suburban Horticulturist ' ; 
and finally, in 1843, he published his work on ' Cemeteries,' 
the last separate work he ever wrote. In this list, many 
minor productions of Mr. Loudon's pen have necessarily been 
omitted ; but it may be mentioned that he contributed to the 
'Encyclopaedia Britannica,' and Brande's 'Dictionary of 
Science ' ; and that he published numerous supplements, from 
time to time, to his various works." 
The adverse circumstances under which all this labor was 
performed make the result appear still more remarkable. 
Early in life, an attack of inflammatory rheumatism permanently 
stiffened one of his knees and contracted his left 
arm. In 1820, his right arm was broken near the shoulder, 
and the bones were never properly united. But he still continued 
to write with his right hand until 1825, when the arm 
was broken a second time, and it became necessary to amputate 
it ; after which, having about this time lost the use of 
the thumb and two fingers of the left hand, he was obliged 
to employ amanuenses. It was under these trying circumstances 
that his great "Arboretum" was prepared. The 
work was undertaken against the advice of his publishers 
and friends, who foresaw that it would wholly absorb his 
former earnings. But it was his favorite and crowning work, 
and he unflinchingly carried it onward to completion ; though 
the result verified the predictions of his advisers. It cost ten 
thousand pounds sterling ; and the whole proceeds of the sale, 
as well as the copyrights of his other works, were pledged to 
the publishers for payment. It is gratifying to learn, that, 
since the writer's decease, an appeal has been made to the 
public in England, and with great success, to purchase copies 
of this work and of the other publications of Mr. Loudon, so 
that the copyright may be redeemed, and their future proceeds 
applied to the benefit of his surviving family. The 
subjects of landscape-gardening and arboriculture are attracting 
increased attention in the United States, and these valuable 
treatises are not yet so generally known as they deserve 
to be ; we have thought it proper, therefore, to make this 
statement. 
While systematically treating of the botanical character, 
propagation, management, and economical uses of trees, Mr. 
Loudon has interwoven a vast amount of curious matter respecting 
their history, geography, and literature. Being himself 
a distinguished landscape-gardener, he has successfully 
treated of their character and adaptation as component parts 
of general scenery, of which they form a most important element 
; for no other constituents —no lifeless objects — produce 
impressions at once so strong and so widely varied as 
trees. He has also collected interesting statistics respecting 
the longevity of trees ; a subject upon which we intend to 
task the patience of our readers to some extent. 
The most interesting ideas connected with trees are those 
suggested by their stability and duration. They far outlast 
all other living things, and form the familiar and appropriate 
symbols of long-protracted existence. "As the days of a tree 
shall be the days of my people " is one of the most beautiful 
and striking figures under which a blessing can be conveyed. 
W e are naturally led to inquire, whether there is any absolute 
limit to their existence. If not destroyed by accident, — 
that is, by extrinsic causes, of whatever sort, —do trees 
eventually perish, like ourselves, from old age ? It is commonly 
thought, no doubt, that trees are fully exposed to the 
inevitable fate of all other living things. The opposite 
opinion seems to involve a paradox, and to be contradicted 
y every one's observation. But popular opinion is an unsafe 
guide ;— the more so in this case, as our ordinary conceptions 
on the subject spring from a false analogy, which we have 
unconsciously established, between plants and animals. This 
common analogy might, perhaps, hold good, if the tree were 
actually formed like the animal, all the parts of which are 
created at once in their rudimentary state, and soon attain 
their fullest development, so that the functions are carried on, 
throughout life, in the same set of organs. If this were the 
case with the tree, it would likewise die, sooner or later, of 
old age, — would perish from causes strictly analogous to 
those which fix a natural limit to the life of animals. The 
unavoidable induration and incrustation of its cells and vessels, 
apart from other causes, would put an early and sure 
limit to the life of the tree, just as it does in fact terminate 
the existence of the leaf, the proper emblem of mortality, — 
which, although it generally lives only a single season, may 
yet truly be said to die of old age. But, as the leaves are 
necessarily renewed every year, so also are the other essential 
organs of the plant. The tree is gradually developed by the 
successive addition of new parts. It annually renews not 
only its buds and leaves, but its wood and its roots ; everything, 
indeed, that is concerned in its life and growth. Thus, 
like the fabled iEson, being restored from the decrepitude of 
age to the bloom of early youth, — the most recent branchlets 
being placed, by means of the latest layer of wood, in favorable 
communication with the newly formed roots, and these 
extending at a corresponding rate into fresh soil, — 
" Quae quantum vertice ad auras 
JEtherias, tantum radice in Tartara tendit," 
why has not the tree all the conditions of existence in the 
thousandth, that it possessed in the hundredth, or the tenth, 
year of its age? The old and central part of the trunk may, 
indeed, decay ; but this is of little moment, so long as new 
layers are regularly formed at the circumference. The tree 
survives ; and it is difficult to show that it is liable to death 
from old age in any proper sense of the term. Nor do we 
arrive at a different conclusion when we contemplate the 
tree under a less familiar but more philosophical aspect, — 
considering it, not as a simple individual, like man or the 
higher animals, but as an aggregate of many individuals, 
which though ordinarily connected with the parent stock, are 
capable of growing by themselves, and indeed often do separate 
spontaneously, and in a variety of ways acquire independent 
existence. If, then, the tree be, as it undeniably is, a 
complex being, an aggregate of as many individuals, united 
in a common trunk, as there are, or have been, buds developed 
on its surface ; and if the component individuals be annually 
renewed, why should not the aggregate, the tree, last indefinitely 
? To establish a proper analogy, we must not compare 
the tree with man, but with the coral formations, in which 
numberless individuals, engrafted and blended on a common 
base, though capable of living when detached from the mass, 
conspire to build up those arborescent structures so puzzling 
to the older naturalists that they were not inappropriately 
named " zoophytes," or animal-plants. The immense coralgroves, 
which have thus grown up in tropical seas, have, no 
doubt, endured for ages ; the inner and older parts consisting 
of the untenanted cells of individuals that have long since 
perished, while fresh structures are continually produced on 
the surface. The individuals, indeed, perish ; but the aggregate 
may endure as long as time itself. So with a tree, considered 
under this point of view. Though the wood in the 
centre of the trunk and large branches — the produce of buds 
and leaves that have long ago disappeared — may die and decay 
; yet while new individuals are formed upon the surface 
with each successive crop of fresh buds, and placed in as 
favorable communication with the soil and the air as their 
predecessors, the aggregate tree would appear to have no 
necessary, no inherent, limit to its existence. 1 
A beautiful confirmation of this view may be drawn from the celebrated 
Banyan, or India Fig-tree, and a few other tropical trees, which 
reefy strike root, high in the open air, from their spreading branches, 
lhese aerial roots, after reaching the earth, become in time new trunks ; 
and the whole tree appears like a huge tent, supported by many columns. 
•Muton's description of the Banyan (in "Paradise Lost") is incorrect, 
far as it supposes the bending branches themselves to reach the 
ground, and there to strike root, just as the gardener propagates shrubs 
No one denies, however, that different species may have an 
habitual period of death ; we only insist that this is not a 
necessary period. In the course of things, a multitude of different 
accidents conspire to fix a mean limit to the life of man, 
which, though far below the natural period of death by old age, 
yet occurs with such regularity, under given conditions, that 
it is made a matter of calculation. So a particular kind of 
tree may be liable to certain accidents, which habitually insure 
its destruction within a definite period. A tree of rapid 
growth generally has a soft and fragile wood, and is therefore 
especially subject to decay, or to be broken or overthrown by 
tempests ; and the chances of its destruction are fearfully 
multiplied with the increasing spread and weight of the 
branches. Each species, too, being somewhat uniformly exposed 
to a particular class of accidents, according to its constitution 
and mode of growth, may consequently exhibit something 
like an average duration. But death can no more be 
said to ensue from old age, in such a case, than in that of the 
ordinary mortality of mankind. The whole tree does not 
necessarily suffer, like the animal, from the death or amputation 
of its limbs ; those that remain may be thereby placed, 
perhaps, in a more favorable condition than before. A tree 
may certainly be conceived to survive all ordinary accidents, 
or to be protected against them, and thus to live indefinitely ; 
while animals, even if shielded from all external injury, must 
at last succumb to internal causes of destruction, — unavoid- 
able, because inseparable from their organization. 
by layering ; whereas the roots themselves descend from a great height. 
When a sufficient number of these collateral trunks are formed to support 
the whole weight, the central, original stem may decay and disappear, 
as it often does, without affecting the existence of the tree ; 
which thus increases into a grove, "high over-arched, with echoing walks 
between," that obviously may endure for an indefinite period. Many 
such trees are known, of immense magnitude, and doubtless of most extraordinary 
age. But the vegetable physiologist well knows that these 
essentially differ from ordinary trees, only in that a portion of the new 
wood, detached as it were from the branches, forms separate trunks instead 
of adhering throughout to the main trunk and contributing to its 
increase in circumference. These collateral trunks merely represent the 
outer and newer layers of ordinary trees, while the main stem represents 
the old and often decaying centre. 
The Talipot Palm, which blossoms but once, and then perishes, 
— or the Century plant, which continues in our conservatories 
even for a hundred years without flowering, but dies 
when it has ripened its fruit, — may be adduced as cases of 
death by old age. But in its native climes, where our socalled 
Century-plant blossoms in the fifth or sixth year of its 
age, it as uniformly dies immediately afterwards. The result, 
in all such cases, is rather analogous to death from parturition, 
than to death by old age. 
This doctrine of the indefinite longevity of trees — that 
they die from injury or disease, or, in one word, from accidents, 
but never really from old age — was first propounded 
by the distinguished De Candolle in one of his earliest writings 
1 near the commencement of the present century. It is 
entirely a modern doctrine (unless, indeed, we may suppose 
that Pliny comprehended the full meaning of his words, 
" Vites sine fine crescunt," which is improbable), and it is by 
no means surprising that it should have been received with 
incredulity, or vehemently controverted, by those who had 
not taken the pains to understand it. For the a priori considerations, 
from which the young Genevan botanist deduced 
his novel theory, were then, in truth, more or less hypothetical, 
and involved some hardy assumptions. They are now, 
however, amply confirmed, or at least so generally admitted 
by all vegetable physiologists, as to give the theory a high 
degree of antecedent probability. But De Candolle proceeded 
to indicate a mode in which its correctness might almost be 
tested by actual observation, and, having accumulated a great 
number of interesting data, he published, in 1831, the memoir 2 
which, having been still further augmented, now constitutes 
one of the most interesting chapters of his masterly " Physiologie 
Vegetale." 
If this view be well founded, it is to be expected that different 
individuals of the same species should perish at very irregular 
periods ; and that some should be found to escape all 
1 " Flore Francaise," 1, p. 223. 
Notice sur la Longevite des Arbres." Par Aug. Pyr. De Candolle, in 
the Bibliotheque Universelle, May, 1831. 
the ordinary accidents that trees are heir to, and thus attain a 
longevity far transcending the habitual duration of the species. 
Is this view sustained by observation ? 
Before adducing the evidence which bears upon this question, 
it is necessary to inquire how the actual age of a tree 
may be ascertained. In most cases, —in all those trees which 
increase in diameter by annual concentric layers, — that is to 
say in nearly all trees except Palms and their allies, which for 
the present we may leave out of the question, the age may be 
directly ascertained by counting the annual rings on a cross 
section of the trunk. The record is sometimes illegible or 
nearly so, but it is perfectly authentic ; and when fairly deciphered, 
we may rely on its correctness. 1 But the venerable 
trunks, whose ages we are most interested in determining, are 
rarely sound to the centre ; and if they were, even the paramount 
interests of science would seldom excuse the arboricide. 
This decisive test, therefore, can seldom be practically employed, 
except in the case of comparatively young trees. The 
most remarkable recorded instance of its application is that 
of one of the old oaks at Bordza, in Samogitia (Russian Poland) 
; which, having been greatly injured by a conflagration, 
was felled in the year 1812, and seven hundred and ten 
concentric layers were distinctly counted on the transverse 
1 The discovery, or at least the first explicit announcement of the now 
familiar fact, that ordinary trees grow by annual layers, so that the record 
of their age is inscribed upon the section of the trunk, is generally 
attributed to Malpighi. But, probably, we should understand this celebrated 
anatomist as merely giving a formal statement of what was already 
popularly known ; for so obvious a fact could scarcely have escaped notice. 
Professor Adrien de Jussieu, the present representative of that illustrious 
family, has, moreover, lately reproduced a passage in the " Voyage 
de Montaigne en Italie," written in the year 1581, nearly fifty 
years before Malpighi was born, which proves this to have been the case. 
" L'ouvrier, homme ingenieux et fameux a faire de beaux instruments de 
Mathe'matique, m'enseinga que tous les arbres portent autant de cercles qu'ils 
out dure d'anne'es, et me le ft voir dans tous ceux qu'il avoit dans sa boutique, 
travaillant en bois. Et la partie qui regard le seplentrion est plus etroite, 
et a les cercles plus serres et plus denses que I autre. 
And now it appears that Leonardo da Vinci knew, and mentioned it — 
as well as phyllotaxis. (MSS. note in Dr. Gray's handwriting.) 
section, from the circumference towards the centre, where the 
space in which the layers could not be clearly made out was 
estimated to have comprised three hundred more. If the injured 
portion was not overestimated, the tree must have been 
a thousand years old. We have now before us a section of a 
fine trunk of the American Cypress (Taxodium distichum), 
upon the radius of which, twenty-seven inches in length, six 
hundred and seventy annual layers may be distinctly counted. 
The wood of this tree is so durable, that probably the age of 
trunks of more than twice that size might be ascertained by 
direct inspection. 
When such a section cannot be obtained, we are obliged to 
resort to other and less direct evidence, affording only approximate, 
or more or less probable, conclusions. Sometimes 
lateral incisions, not endangering the life of the tree, furnish 
the means of inspecting and measuring a considerable number 
of the outer layers, and of computing the age of the trunk from 
its diameter and actual rate of growth. But as young trees 
grow much more rapidly than old ones, we should greatly exaggerate 
the age of a large trunk, if we deduced its rate of 
growth from the outer layers alone. We must therefore 
ascertain, by repeated observations, the average thickness of 
the layers of young trees of the same species ; and by the 
judicious combination of both these data, a highly probable 
estimate may often be formed. 
When unable to inspect any portion of the annual layers of 
remarkable old trees, we may occasionally obtain other indications 
upon which some reliance may be placed ; such as the 
amount of increase in circumference between stated intervals ; 
but as, on the one hand, we can never depend upon the entire 
accuracy of two measurements made at widely distant periods, 
while, on the other, the growth of a small number of years, 
however carefully ascertained, would be an unsafe criterion, 
this method can seldom be employed with much confidence. 
A more common mode is to employ the average rate of growth 
of the oldest trees of which complete sections have been examined, 
for the approximate determination of the age of remarkably 
large trunks of the same species, where the size 
alone is known. For often repeated observation proves that 
the increase is greatest, in other words, the layers are thickest, 
in young trees ; but that afterwards — after the first 
century, for instance — the tree increases in diameter at a 
much slower but somewhat uniform, or else still decreasing 
rate, which does not greatly vary in different trees of the 
same species. Such estimates would, therefore, always tend 
to underrate, rather than to exaggerate, the age of a large 
tree. But it is unsafe to apply this method to other than 
really venerable trunks ; for the growth of a tree is liable to 
great variations during the first century or two ; either from 
year to year, or between different individuals of the same species. 
The injury of a single leading root or branch, or the 
influence of a stratum of sterile soil, may affect the whole 
growth of a young tree for a series of years ; while, in an 
older individual, the wide distribution of the roots and multiplication 
of the branches render the effect of local injuries 
nearly inappreciable, and the influence of any one or more 
unfavorable seasons is lost in the average of a great number. 
Thus the fine Elm in Cambridge, which during the last winter 
fell a victim to one of the most fatal and frequent accidents 
which in this country interfere with the longevity of 
trees, — having been cut down to make room for a petty 
building, just as it had reached its hundredth anniversary, — 
was fourteen feet in circumference at the height of three or 
four feet from the ground. 1 The girth of its more renowned 
and fortunate neighbor, the " Washington Elm," is but little 
over thirteen feet ; and it might accordingly be inferred that 
it is some years the junior of the " Palmer Elm." But we 
learn from a very authentic source, that the celebrated Whitfield, 
when excluded from the pulpits of the town and college, 
preached under the shade of this tree in the summer of 1744, 
— just a century ago. It is, doubtless, at least one hundred 
1 This " Palmer Elm," as it was called, grew with more than ordinary 
rapidity for the first seventy years ; when, to casual observation, it must 
have appeared nearly as large as when it was felled. For, during the 
last twenty-two years, it had increased only five and one-half inches in 
diameter, that is, at the rate of a quarter of an inch per annum. 
and twenty or one hundred and thirty years old. We wish 
to place its size upon record for the use of future generations 
• and we therefore take this opportunity to state, that 
the trunk of the "Washington Elm," at Cambridge, now 
measures thirteen feet and two and a half inches m circumference, 
at the height of three feet from the ground ; this 
being the point at which the girth is smallest, being unaffected 
either by the expansion of the roots below, or of the 
branches above, and therefore the proper place to measure it 
for this purpose. That this size is conformable to the age assigned 
is apparent from a comparison with other trees ; such, 
for instance, as the " Aspinwall Elm, in Brookline standingnear 
the ancient house belonging to the family o that name, 
and which was known to be one hundred and eighty-one years 
old in 1837, when it measured sixteen feet eight inches at five 
feet from the ground, and twenty-six feet five inches close by 
the surface." » The noted Elm upon Boston Common should 
be about the same age. Its present girth, at five feet from 
the ground, is sixteen feet and one inch; at the height of 
three feet it measures seventeen feet eleven inches ; near the 
earth, twenty-three feet and six inches. We haveseen a map 
of Boston, published in the year 1720, upon which this Elm 
is delineated as a large tree. Its age, therefore, is certainly 
as great as that assigned to it in the subjoined account, which 
recently appeared in the newspapers of the day; - we know 
not upon what authority. 2 
1 We quote the manuscript of an esteemed friend, who has devoted 
much attention to the history and growth of trees, and whose ong expected 
volume, on the trees of New England, we hope will soon be gi.en 
» As such data may hereafter possess some interest, we may »mply 
state, that the large "English Elm," one of the finest trees on Boston 
Common, is now eleven feet two inches in girth, at five feet from the 
ground ; and twelve feet three inches, at the height of three feet. The 
American Elm, near the Botanic Garden at Cambridge, m front of he 
bouse of Judge Phillips, has a girth of thirteen feet at six feet from the 
earth, and of fifteen feet, three feet lower down. Its neighbor, oppose 
the gardener's residence, is fourteen feet three inches in circumference, 
at six feet from the ground. (MSS. note in Dr. Gray's handwriting. 
1874, Phillip's 14-9f, Sander's 15-7£.) 
" The ' Boston Traveller ' states that this noble tree was set 
out about the year 1670, by Captain Daniel Henchman, and is 
therefore one hundred and seventy-five years old. Captain 
Henchman was a schoolmaster in Boston from 1666 to 1671. 
He joined the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company in 
1675. He was a distinguished captain, in King Philip's 
war, of a company of infantry. Forty -five years ago, the 
Great Elm had a large hollow in it, and was rapidly decaying, 
but was treated in a mode recommended by Forsyth, by 
clearing the cavity of rotten wood, and filling it with a composition 
composed principally of lime, rubbish from old buildings, 
and clay, and thus restored. It is now apparently as 
flourishing as ever, and without any appearance of the hollow, 
which was once large enough for a boy to hide himself 
in. The tree is a native Elm, which is the most hardy kind. 
Many of the old Elm-trees are what are called English Elms, 
with less extended roots and branches than the American." 
But more commonly, perhaps, our estimates rest, either 
wholly or in part, upon historical evidence or tradition ; and 
the most numerous and best authenticated cases of this kind 
may be expected to occur in Europe, where many trees, especially 
Chestnuts, Lindens, Oaks, and Yews, may be satisfactorily 
traced by records through several centuries. 
Having thus briefly indicated the kinds or sources of evidence 
which are brought to bear with more or less directness 
and force upon this interesting question, we proceed to offer 
a condensed account of some of the more remarkable or curious 
cases of longevity in trees ; which may show to what 
extent, and with what results, this various testimony has been 
actually applied. The evidence is cumulative. Individual 
cases would be little worth, if unsupported by others. But 
mutually strengthening each other, the obvious conclusion becomes 
almost irresistible, even when the testimony in particular 
cases is very imperfect. 
We leave entirely out of view the numerous allusions to old 
trees that may be gathered from classical writers. Nor are 
the more circumstantial accounts by Pausanias, Josephus, or 
the Elder Pliny, available for our present purpose. The two 
latter, indeed, speak of trees as old as the creation ;1; 1 but they 
have unfortunately neglected to mention the evidence upon 
which their opinions were founded. Restricting ourselves, 
therefore, to trees which still survive, or which have existed 
within recent times, we commence our enumeration with one 
which is rather remarkable for its historical associations than 
for any extraordinary longevity ; namely, the celebrated Sycamore 
Maple (Acer Pseudo-Platanus), which stands near 
the entrance of the village of Trons, in the Grisons, the cradle 
of liberty among the Rhetian Alps. Under the once 
spreading branches of this now hollow and cloven trunk, the 
Gray League — so called, either from the gray beards, or the 
home-spun clothing, of the peasants who there met the nobles 
favorable to their cause — was solemnly ratified in March, 
1424. Upon the supposition that it was only a century old 
when the meeting, to which its celebrity is owing, took place, 
— and a younger tree would hardly have been selected for the 
purpose, —it has now attained the age of five hundred and 
twenty years. It can scarcely be younger, it may be much 
older than this. In some of the earlier accounts, this tree is 
said to be a Linden. Indeed, it is so called in the inscription 
upon the walls of the adjacent little chapel. They were better 
patriots than botanists in those days ; for the investigations 
of Colonel Bontemps leave no doubt as to the identity 
of the tree. 2 
The Linden itself, however, is associated with some interesting 
points of Swiss history ; it also affords some instances 
of remarkable longevity, which the lightness and softness of 
its wood would by no means lead us to expect. The Linden 
in the town of Freiburg, which was planted in 1476, to commemorate 
the bloody battle of Morat, though now beginning 
to decay, has already proved a more durable memorial than 
the famous ossuary on the battlefield, 
1 Josephus relates, that he saw near Hebron a Terebinthus which had 
existed ever since the creation (Lib. V., c. 31) ; and Pliny speaks of 
Oaks in the Hercynian forest, which he deems coeval with the world. 
(Hist. Nat., Lib. xvi., c. 2.) 
2 " Bibliotheque Univ. de Gene've," Aout, 1831. 
" Where Burgundy bequeathed his tombless host, 
A bony heap, through ages to remain 
Themselves their monument ; " — 
and may even outlast the obelisk recently erected upon its 
site. The age of this tree and the girth of its trunk beingwell 
known, — having attained the circumference of fourteen 
English feet in 364 years, — it has been employed as a standard 
of comparison, in computing the age of larger and more 
venerable trunks of the same species. 
Such a tree is still standing at the village of Villars-en- 
Moing, near the town of Morat, in full health and vigor, 
although portions of the bark are known to have been stripped 
off about the time of the battle in 1476, when it was already 
a noted tree. At four feet above the ground, the trunk has 
a circumference of thirty-eight English feet, and consequently 
a diameter of about twelve feet. Supposing it to have grown, 
on the whole, even a little more rapidly than the Freiburg- 
Linden, which may be deemed a safe estimate, when we 
recollect that old trees grow much more slowly than younger 
ones, — supposing it to have increased in diameter at the average 
rate of one sixth of an inch in a year, it must have been 
864 years old at the time the measurement was made, in the 
year 1831. It is not probable that this estimate materially 
exaggerates the age of the tree, even supposing the Linden at 
Freiburg to have grown at less than the average rate for the 
species. It is nearly corroborated, indeed, by the more celebrated 
Linden of Neustadt on the Kocher, in Wiirtemberg, 
whose age rests wholly upon historic evidence. The readers 
of Evelyn will surely remember his interesting account of this 
tree ; and in recent times, some further particulars in its history 
have been rescued from oblivion by M. Jules Trembley, 
who visited it in 1831, at the instance of the illustrious De 
Candolle. It must have been already remarkable early in the 
thirteenth century ; for, as is proved by documents still extant 
in the registers of the town, the village of Helmbundt, having 
been destroyed in the year 1226, was rebuilt three years afterwards, 
at some distance from its former site, in the vicinity 
of this tree, and took the name of " Neustadt an der grossen 
Linden." An old poem, which bears the date of 1408, informs 
us, that " before the gate rises a Linden, whose branches are 
sustained by sixty-seven columns." The number of these 
columns, or pillars of stone, raised to support the heavy and 
widely spreading branches, one of which extends horizontally 
for more than a hundred feet, had increased to eighty-two 
when the tree was visited by Evelyn, and to one hundred and 
six when it was examined by Trembley. To these supports, 
doubtless, its preservation is chiefly owing; as the tender 
wood of the Linden could never sustain the enormous weight 
of the limbs, or resist the force of the winds. These pillars 
are nearly covered with inscriptions ; of which the most ancient 
that was extant in Evelyn's time bore the date of 1551 ; but 
the oldest now legible bears the arms of Christopher, Duke of 
Wiirtemberg, with the date of 1558. At five or six feet from 
the ground, the trunk is thirty-five and a half English feet in 
circumference. If, therefore, it has grown at the actual rate 
of the Freiburg Linden, it must nearly have reached its thousandth 
anniversary. Or if, as in the case of the tree near 
Morat, we allow a sixth of an inch per annum for the average 
increase in diameter, its computed age would be a little over 
800 years ; surely, a moderate estimate for a tree which was 
called the Great Linden more than six centuries ago. 
No tree of temperate climates so frequently attains an extraordinary 
size as the Plane, or Sycamore (Platanus) ; trunks 
of forty or fifty feet in circumference being by no means uncommon 
in this country. The Oriental Plane offers many 
equally striking instances in the south of Europe, particularly 
in the Levant. The celebrated tree on the island of Cos, so 
conspicuously seen from the channel on the Asiatic side, has 
recently been beautifully figured in Allen's " Pictorial Tour 
in the Mediterranean." 
But old trunks, both of Oriental and our own very similar 
species, are always hollow, — mere shells ; hence, in the absence 
of historical data, their age is only to be computed by their 
rate of growth ; which is so rapid for the first century or two, 
and, at the same time, the wood is so liable to decay, that the 
Plane-tree is not likely to afford any instances of extreme 
longevity. A different conclusion might, indeed, be drawn 
from the account of an enormous Plane in the valley of Bouyondereh, 
near Constantinople, described by Olivier, Dr. 
Walsh, and others ; the trunk of which is one hundred and 
fifty feet in girth, with a central hollow of eighty feet in circumference. 
But the recent observations of an excellent 
scientific observer, Mr. Webb, leave no doubt that this monster-trunk 
is formed by the junction of several original trees, 
planted in close proximity. 1 Along the shores of the Bosphorus 
there are many groups of younger Planes, which, for 
their shade, have been designedly planted in a narrow circle, 
and their trunks will in time become similarly incorporated. 
Pliny's Lycian Plane, with a cavity of eighty-one feet in circumference, 
in which the consul Licinius Mutianus used to 
lodge with a suite of eighteen persons, may have had such an 
origin. 
We next notice the Chestnuts, for the purpose of disposing 
of an analogous case of pseudo-longevity ; that of the famous 
" Castagno di cento cavalli " ; so named from the somewhat 
apocryphal tradition, that Jeanne of Aragon, and a hundred 
cavaliers of her suite, took refuge under its branches during 
a heavy shower, and were completely sheltered from the rain. 
According to Brydone, who visited it in the year 1770, the 
trunk, or rather trunks, — for it then had the appearance of 
five distinct trees, — measured two hundred and four feet in 
circumference ; but later and more trustworthy observers 
reduce these dimensions to one hundred and eighty or one 
hundred and ninety feet. A hut has been erected in the 
hollow space, with an oven, in which the inhabitants dry the 
chestnuts and other fruits which they wish to preserve for 
winter, using at times, for fuel, pieces cut with a hatchet from 
the interior of the tree. The separation of a large hollow 
1 Moquin-Tandon, " Teratologic Ve'ge'tale," p. 290. —By the way, although 
De Candolle was not at the time apprised of the real nature of 
this Plane, yet he was far too cautious a reasoner to estimate its age at 
2000 years, as Mr. Nuttall has inadvertently stated (Sylva, i. p. 50). 
Whoever will read the whole paragraph in the " Physiologie Ve'ge'tale," 
ii. p. 994, will perceive that it will by no means bear that construction. 
trunk into independent portions, appearing like the remains 
of as many distinct trees, is not in itself improbable. The 
ancient Yew ill Fortingal churchyard, Scotland, presents 
a striking instance of the kind. Indeed, Brydone's guide 
assured him " that, by the universal tradition and even testimony 
of the country, all these were once united in one stem ; 
that their grandfathers remembered this, when it was looked 
upon as the glory of the forest, and visited from all quarters ; 
though, for many years past, it had been reduced to the ruin 
we beheld. We began to examine it with more attention, 
and found that there is an appearance that these five trees 
were once really united in one. The opening in the middle 
is at present prodigious, and it does indeed require faith to 
believe that so vast a space was once occupied by solid timber. 
But there is no appearance of bark on the inside of 
any of the stumps, nor on the sides that are opposite to one 
another. ... I have since been told by the Canon Ricupero, 
an ingenious ecclesiastic of this place, that he was at the expense 
of carrying up peasants with tools to dig round the 
' Castagno di cento cavalli ' ; and he assures me, upon his 
honor, that he found all these stems united below ground into 
one root." J 
It appears, however, that Brydone has not fairly represented 
the worthy Canon Ricupero's opinion ; for he thought it probable 
that these present trunks were offshoots from the persistent 
base of a more ancient stem ; a conclusion which is 
fully sustained by the observations of several competent naturalists, 
such as Duby, 2 Brunner, 3 and Philippi. 4 Every one 
knows how readily the Chestnut will throw up shoots from 
the root ; and Philippi says it is a general custom in Sicily 
to cut them down after they have attained a considerable 
size, when the new stems that are thrown out from the base 
shortly become trees again. Other considerations would pre- 
1 " Tour through Sicily and Malta." 
2 De Candolle, " Phys. Vdg.," ii. p. 992. 
3 " Excursion through the East of Liguria, Sicily, and Malta." 
4 " Ueber die Vegetation am iEtna " ; in"Limuea,"vii. p. 727; and in 
"Comp. to Bot. Mag.," i. p. 90. 
vent our assigning the highest antiquity to a tree not originally 
indigenous to Sicily, but doubtless introduced from the 
East. 
There are, however, some colossal Chestnuts upon Mount 
Etna, with undoubtedly single trunks ; three of which, recently 
measured, are found to have a circumference respectively 
of fifty-seven, sixty-four, and seventy feet. Some general 
idea of their age may perhaps be formed by a comparison 
with other individuals, whose history is better known, such as 
that at Sancerre, described by Bose, which, although only 
thirty-three feet in girth at six feet from the ground, has been 
called the " Great Chestnut of Sancerre " for six hundred 
years ; or the celebrated " Tortworth Chestnut," which Strutt, 
who in his " Sylva Britannica " has given a fine illustration 
of its massive bole, considers as probably the largest as well 
as the oldest tree standing in England, and which in the 
reign of Stephen, who ascended the throne in 1135, was 
already remarkable for its size, and well known as a signal 
boundary to the manor of Tamworth, now Tortworth, in 
Gloucestershire. But even this tree, although it has probably 
long since celebrated its thousandth anniversary, does not 
equal the smallest of the three Sicilian Chestnuts, being only 
fifty-two feet in circumference at five feet from the ground. 
In the ascending scale of longevity, we pass from the Chestnut 
to the Oak, the emblem of embodied strength, one of the 
longest-lived, as it is the slowest-growing, of deciduous-leaved 
forest trees. The light and soft wood of the Linden, and 
even of the Chestnut, seems incompatible with great longevity. 
Such trees of eight hundred or a thousand years old are 
extraordinary phenomena, owing their prolonged existence to 
a rare conjunction of favorable circumstances, — the more 
important, as they are unexpected witnesses to the truth of 
our leading proposition. But this is no very uncommon age 
for that 
"Lord of the woods, the long-surviving Oak." 
The briefest biographical notice of Oaks remarkable for 
their age or size, or for historic memorials attesting their 
antiquity, would alone fill our pages. We can only refer the 
curious reader to the pages of Evelyn, of Gilpin, and of 
Strutt ; to the learned, but over-labored, " Amcenitates Quercinese 
" of the late Professor Burnet, in Burgess's " Eidodendron," 
and especially to the more accessible and standard 
Arboretum of Loudon, whose condensed statistical account 
of celebrated British Oaks, occupying thirty closely printed 
pages of that elaborate work, is a monument of diligence, 
and contains a vast amount of interesting information. Indeed, 
Mr. Loudon's whole account of the Oak is incomparable, 
and should alone suffice to immortalize his name. Among 
the oldest specimens now extant in England are to be enumerated, 
the " Parliament Oak," in Clipstone Park, supposed 
to be the oldest park in England, which derives its name 
from a Parliament having been held under it by Edward 
the First, in 1290 ; the Oak in Yardly Chase, which Cowper 
has immortalized ; the " Winfarthing Oak," now a bleached 
ruin, which is said to have been called an old oak at the time 
of the Conquest; the Oak in Melbury Park, Dorsetshire, 
which Mitchell calls " as curly, surly, knotty an old monster 
as can be conceived " ; the " Greendale Oak," in the Duke of 
Portland's park at Welbeck, well known from Evelyn's account, 
and from the series of figures which his editor, Hunter, 
has given of its mutilated trunk, pierced by a lofty arch 
through which carriages have been driven ; the " Cowthorpe 
Oak," in Yorkshire, also figured by Hunter, the trunk of 
which measures seventy-eight feet in circumference near the 
ground, and the age is estimated as nearly coeval with the 
Christian era ; and the " Great Oak of Salcey Forest," in 
Northamptonshire, " a most picturesque sylvan ruin," which 
is perhaps of equal antiquity. 
We have already mentioned the tree at Bordza, felled some 
thirty years ago, which was proved, by inspection of its annual 
layers, to have been about a thousand years old. Its trunk 
was forty English feet in circumference, or twelve and a half 
feet in diameter. This was a goodly tree for an Oak ; but it 
shrinks almost to insignificance when compared with one in 
the south of France ; an account of which has quite recently 
been published. From a late number of the "Gardeners' 
Chronicle," edited by Professor Lindley, we copy the following 
account, which purports to have been extracted from the 
Annals of the Agricultural Society of Rochelle. 
"At about six miles west-southwest of Saintes (in the 
Lower Charente) near the road to Cozes, stands an old Oaktree, 
in the large court of a modern mansion, which still 
promises to live many centuries, if the axe of some Vandal 
does not cut it down. The following are the proportions of 
this king of the forests of France, and probably of all Europe. 
The diameter of the trunk at the ground is from nine to ten 
yards [consequently its circumference is from eighty-five to 
ninety-four feet] ; at the height of a man, from six and a half 
to seven and a half yards [from sixty to sixty-seven feet in 
circumference] ; the diameter of the whole head, from forty 
to forty-three yards ; the height of the trunk, eight yards ; the 
general height of the tree, twenty-two yards. A room has 
been cut out of the dead wood of the interior of the trunk, 
. 
measuring from nine to twelve feet in diameter, and nine feet 
high ; and they have cut a circular seat out of the solid wood. 
They put a round table in the middle, when it is wanted, 
around which twelve guests can sit. A door and a window 
admit daylight into this new sort of dining-room, which is 
adorned by a living carpet of Ferns, Fungi, Lichens, etc. 
Upon a plate of wood taken from the trunk about the height 
of the door, two hundred annual rings have been counted, 
whence it results, in taking a horizontal radius from the exterior 
circumference to the centre of the oak, that there must 
have been from 1800 to 2000 of these rings ; which makes its 
age nearly two thousand years." 
i 
We should have been told, however, from what portion of 
the radius this block was taken. If near the circumference, 
where the rings are the narrowest, the age of the tree has 
been over-estimated ; perhaps not materially so, as it must 
have been growing at a slow and nearly equable rate for 
many centuries ; if towards the centre, the computed age is 
within the truth. To this tree, therefore, as being probably 
the patriarch of the species in Europe, may well be applied 
the lines addressed by Cowper to the Yardley Oak : — 
" O, eouldst thou speak, 
As in Dodona once thy kindred trees, 
Oracular, I would not curious ask 
The future, best unknown ; but, at thy mouth, 
Inquisitive, the less ambiguous past ! 
By thee I might correct, erroneous oft, 
The clock of history ; facts and events 
Timing more punctual ; unrecorded facts 
Recovering ; and misstated, setting right." 
Rich although this country is, above all other parts of the 
world, in different species of the Oak, it would not be difficult 
to explain why we cannot boast of such venerable trees, 
" Whose boughs are mossed with age, 
And high top bald with dry antiquity." 
It is not merely, or chiefly, that, in clearing away the forest 
which so recently covered the soil, " men were famous according 
as they had lifted up axes upon the thick trees." The 
close, stifling growth of our primeval forests, like the democratic 
institutions which they seem to foreshadow, although 
favorable to mediocrity, forbids preeminence. " A chilly, 
cheerless, everlasting shade " prevents the fullest individual 
development ; and even if the woodman's axe had spared the 
older trees, their high-drawn trunks, no longer shielded by 
the dense array of their brethren, were sure to be overthrown 
by the winds. Had the aboriginal inhabitants been tillers of 
the ground, our White Oaks had long since spread their 
broad brawny arms, and emulated their more renowned 
brethren in the parks of England. The " Charter Oak "at 
Hartford, so conspicuous in the colonial history of Connecticut, 
and a few others of equal size, but less note, were probably 
mere saplings at the first settlement of the country. 
" The Wadsworth Oak," in Geneseo, N. Y., however, may 
claim a higher antiquity. It stands in an old " Indian clearing," 
on the bank of the Genesee River, which, we are sorry 
to say, is gradually undermining its roots and threatening its 
destruction ; — a catastrophe which we beseech the worthy 
proprietor of that princely estate to avert, by a seasonable 
embankment. A note in an earlier volume of this Review 1 
1 Vol. xliv. p. 345, note. 
assigns to this noble tree the age of at least five hundred 
y ears .— a credible estimate, notwithstanding the girth of the 
tree is somewhat overstated in that account. Its circumference 
at the smallest part of the trunk (four feet above the 
ground), — which is always the proper point for measurement, 
_ instead of from twenty-four to twenty-seven, is only 
twenty-two feet four inches ; although near the base, owing to 
the influence of the spreading roots, its girth is considerably 
greater. 
But of all American species, the invaluable Live Oak of 
our southern coasts will probably be found to attain the greatest 
longevity ; although it seldom becomes a very large, or, 
at any rate, a very tall tree. Like the finest European Oaks, 
its branches spread very widely, and contain a prodigious 
quantity of timber. " The trunk of the Live Oak," says Mr. 
Bartram, in his delightful " Travels in Florida," " is generally 
[on the St. John's River] from twelve to eighteen feet in 
girth, and rises ten or twelve feet erect from the earth ; some 
I have seen eighteen or twenty ; then divides itself into three, 
four, or five great limbs which continue to grow in nearly a 
horizontal direction, each limb forming a gentle curve, or 
arch, from its base to its extremity. I have stepped above 
fifty paces, on a straight line, from the trunk of one of these 
trees to the extremity of the limbs." 
The younger Michaux mentions a tree felled near Charleston, 
whose trunk was twenty-four feet in circumference ; and 
we learn that another individual of still greater size is still 
flourishing on the plantation of Mr. Middleton, near that 
city. According to Mr. Nuttall, 1 the tree sometimes acquires 
the diameter of eight or nine feet in west Florida. All these 
trees must have attained a great age ; for this heavy and almost 
incorruptible wood is of extremely slow growth. May 
we not hope that some competent observer will collect the 
requisite information upon this subject, before all the larger 
trunks have yielded to their impending fate ? 
The Olive grows much more slowly than the Oak, and as 
its wood is very compact and durable, it is not surprising 
that it should furnish instances of extraordinary longevity. 
In comparative youth, the stem increases in diameter only at 
the rate of an eighth of an inch in a year. Therefore the 
Olive at Pescio, mentioned by De Candolle, having a trunk 
of twenty-four feet in girth, should be seven hundred years 
old ; even supposing it to have grown, throughout, at the 
ordinary rate for younger trees ; while the still larger tree at 
Beaulieu, near Nice, described by Risso, and recently measured 
by Berthelot, doubtless the oldest of the race in Europe, 
should be more than a thousand years old. Although now in 
a state of decrepitude, it still bears an abundant crop of fruit, 
or at least did so, as late as the year 1828. : It is not improbable, 
therefore, that those eight venerable trees, which 
yet survive upon the Mount of Olives, may have been in 
existence, as tradition asserts, at the time of our Saviour's 
23assion. 
Let us now direct our attention to the class of coniferous 
trees, among which, on account of the resinous matters that 
commonly pervade their wood and tend to preserve it from 
decay, as well as for other reasons which we will not stop to 
explain, instances of longevity may be expected to occur not 
inferior to those already noticed. 
We begin with the classical cypress ( Cupressus sempervirens), 
so celebrated in all antiquity for the incorruptibility 
of its wood and its funeral uses ; doubtless, one of the longest 
lived trees of southern Europe and of the East. Hunter, 
in his edition of Evelyn, about a century ago, mentions the 
fine avenue of Cypresses " Los Cupressos de la Reyna Sultana," 
which adorns the garden of the Generaliffe at Granada. 
Under their shade, according to the well-known legend, 
the last Moorish king of Granada surprised his wife with one 
of the Abencerrages, which led to the massacre of thirty-six 
princes of that race. This was, of course, before the year 
1492, the date of the final expulsion of the Moors. These 
enduring memorials of frailty and revenge were still flourishing 
in perennial vigor in 1831, when they were examined by 
1 Risso, "Hist. Nat. Europ. Merid.," ex Moquin-Tandon, "Teratol. 
Veg," p. 105. 
Mr. Webb. Supposing them to have been only forty or fifty 
years old at the occurrence of the event to which they owe 
their celebrity, — surely a reasonable supposition, as they 
were then large trees, according to the legend, — they have 
now reached the age of about four hundred years. They are 
probably much older than this. 
But these and all other Cypresses known in Europe are 
striplings in comparison with the tree at Somma, in Lombardy, 
which Loudon has figured in his Arboretum (p. 2470), 
from an original drawing furnished by Signor Manetti of 
Monza. The tree is greatly reverenced by the inhabitants 
of that part of Lombardy, who have a tradition that it was 
planted in the year of our Saviour's birth. Even Napoleon 
is said to have treated it with some deference, and to have 
deviated from a direct line to avoid injuring it, when laying 
down the plan for the great road over the Simplon. Its 
trunk was twenty feet in girth, according to the Abbe Belize's 
measurement, in 1832, or twenty-three feet at the height 
of a foot from the ground, as Signor Manetti states. Since 
the Cypress only attains the circumference of fourteen or fifteen 
feet in four hundred years or more, and after that must 
increase with extreme slowness, we may, perhaps, place some 
credit in the popular tradition respecting the age of this tree, 
or in the testimony of the Abbe Beleze, who informed Mr. 
Loudon that his brother assured him, that there is an ancient 
chronicle extant at Milan, which proves this tree to have 
been in existence in the time of Julius Caesar ! 
To the same class, also, belongs the goodly Cedar of Lebanon 
(Cedrus Libani), from which the sacred writers have 
derived so many forcible and noble images. It is generally 
employed as an emblem of perennial vigor and longevity. 
The most plausible derivation of the name is from the Arabic 
" kedroum " or " kedre," signifying " power " ; and the most 
characteristic description of the tree, with its widespread horizontal 
branches and close-woven leafy canopy, is that given 
by the prophet Ezekiel, where it is assumed as a type of the 
grandeur and strength of the Assyrian empire. 
" Behold, the Assyrian was a Cedar in Lebanon, with fair 
branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature 
; and his top was among the thick boughs. . . . Thus was 
he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches ; for 
his root was by great waters. The Cedars in the garden of 
God could not hide him ; the Fir-trees were not like his 
boughs, and the Chestnut-trees were not like his branches ; 
nor any tree in the garden of God like unto him in beauty." 
(Ezekiel, xxxi. 3, 7, 8.) 
The celebrated grove near the summit of Mount Lebanon, 
to which there are particular allusions in Holy Writ, was first 
described in modern times by Belon, who visited it about the 
year 1550. The majestic old Cedars of this grove —at that 
time the sole, as they are still the finest, known representatives 
of the species — were then, as now, venerated by the Maronite 
Christians, who firmly believed them to have been coeval 
with Solomon, if not planted by his own hands, and made an 
annual pilgrimage to the spot, at the festival of the Transfiguration 
; the Patriarch celebrating high mass under one of 
the oldest Cedars, and very properly anathematizing all who 
should presume to injure them. The larger trees were described 
and measured by Rauwolf, an early German traveler, 
in 1574 ; by Thevenot, in 1655 ; and more particularly 
by Maundrell, in 1696 ; by La Roque, in 1722 ; by Dr. Pococke, 
in 1744, and by Labillardiere, in 1787 ; since which 
time; De Candolle states, that all the older trees have been 
destroyed. But we have not been able to find the authority 
for this statement, and have reason to doubt its correctness. 
Although the number of large trees has diminished in 
every succeeding age, yet several recent visitors mention a 
few laro-e trunks of equal size with those described by the 
earlier travelers. Indeed, M. Laure, an officer of the French 
Marine, who with the Prince de Joinville visited Mount 
Lebanon in the autumn of 1836, says, that all but one of the 
sixteen old Cedars mentioned by Maundrell are still alive, 
although in a decaying state ; and that one of the healthiest, 
but perhaps the smallest trunks, measured thirty-three French 
feet, or about thirty-six English feet, in circumference, which, 
by the way, is nearly the girth of the largest that Maundrell 
measured. We have little faith, however, in this particular 
identification ; nor do we place confidence in the rate of growth 
of old Cedars, as deduced from the measurement of these trees 
at different periods. For, could we be sure that any two of 
these measurements were actually taken from the same trunk, 
it is still very unlikely that they were made at the same height 
from the ground, — a matter of great consequence, but which 
is left out of view in the records of the early travelers. But 
the girth of the larger trees being known by various measurements, 
and the average rate of growth of young Cedars being 
approximately determined from individuals that have grown 
in Europe, of well ascertained age and size, — such, for instance, 
as those in the Chelsea Botanic Garden, near London, 
planted in 1683, and the fine tree which adorns the hill in the 
Jardin des Plantes at Paris, and which was brought from 
England in 1734 by Bernard de Jussieu, — carried, it is 
said, in the crown of his hat for greater security, whose trunk, 
at its centennial anniversary, had just attained the circumference 
of ten feet, — we only need to know the thickness of the 
outer layers of these remarkable old trunks, or, in other 
words, their actual and recent rate of increase, in order to 
form a highly probable estimate of their age. By a few careful 
incisions into these trunks, the next traveler into the now 
frequented East, who feels interested in such questions, might 
supply this remaining desideratum, without real injury to 
these renowned natural monuments, or just exposure to the 
Patriarch's anathema. 
From such very imperfect data as we now possess, De 
Candolle deems the trees measured by Rauwolf to have been 
at least six hundred years old ; which would give the age of 
nearly nine hundred years to any of the number that may 
still survive. This estimate may fall considerably below the 
truth ; but our present knowledge will not warrant the assumption 
of a higher one. Doubtless, this remarkable forest 
has existed from primeval times, while the oldest individuals, 
from age to age, have decayed and disappeared. But venerable 
as are the present representatives, which La Martine so 
grandiloquently apostrophizes, and conceives to have existed 
in the days of Solomon, "yet few comparatively have the 
days of the years of their life been, and have not attained 
unto the days of the years of the life of their fathers," the 
real patriarchs of the world-renowned grove. 
The Yew has, probably, a well founded claim to its reputation 
as the longest-lived tree of northern Europe ; and its 
longevity appears the less surprising, when the closeness and 
incorruptibility of the wood are considered, as well as its extreme 
slowness of growth. A Yew 
" Of vast circumference and gloom profound " 
is truly, as Wordsworth has it, 
" a living thing, 
Produced too slowly ever to decay ; 
Of form and aspect too magnificent 
To be destroyed." 
The frequent occurrence of ancient Yews in English churchyards 
is simply and beautifully explained by Mr. Bowman ; x 
— the Yew, being indisputably indigenous to Great Britain, 
and being, from its perennial verdure, its longevity, and the 
durability of its wood, at once an emblem and an example of 
immortality, its branches would be employed by our Pagan 
ancestors, on their first arrival, as the best substitute for the 
Cypress, to deck the graves of the dead, and for other sacred 
purposes ; and the innocent custom, like others of heathen 
origin, would naturally be retained and engrafted upon Christianity 
at its first introduction. 
From the inspection of various trunks of two or three 
hundred years old, De Candolle drew the conclusion that the 
trunk of the Yew increases in diameter at the rate of a little 
more than a line — the twelfth of an inch — in a year for the 
first one hundred and fifty years, and at a little less than this 
rate during the next century or two. De Candolle proposed, 
therefore, to estimate the age of ancient Yews by assuming a 
line per annum as their average growth in diameter. Their 
age would in this way be readily computed by measuring their 
circumference, and thence obtaining the radius in lines ; the 
tree being reckoned as many years old as there are lines in 
1 In "Mag. Nat. Hist.," 2d ser., i. p. 86. 
its diameter. Since all trees grow the more slowly as they 
advance in years, this method would seem to be a safe one, if 
we were well assured that the average rate of growth has 
been correctly assumed. But extended observation upon 
Yews in England has shown that young trees often grow 
much more rapidly than De Candolle supposed ; so that, from 
the application of his rule to Yews not more than four or five 
hundred years old, we should be liable greatly to exaggerate 
their age. But it is also found that still older trees grow so 
much more slowly, that the rule may be applied to very ancient 
Yews with reasonable probability that the estimate will 
fall beneath the truth, and make them appear younger than 
they really are. The greater the circumference of the tree, the 
less the danger that its more rapid early growth will falsify 
the estimate. The adoption of this rule leads, however, to 
rather startling conclusions. 
The computed age of the famous Yews of Fountains' Abbey, 
near Ripon, in Yorkshire, is to a great extent sustained by 
the history of the abbey itself, as chronicled by Hugh, a monk 
of Kirkstall, whose narrative — still preserved, it is said, in 
the library of the Royal Society — forms the basis of the well 
known account in Burton's " Monasticon." This monastery, 
the noble ruins of which are now overlooked by the venerable 
trees that watched its erection, was founded in the year 1132, 
by Thurstan, Archbishop of York, for certain monks, whose 
consciences, being too tender to allow them to indulge in the 
relaxed habits of their own order, made them desirous of 
adopting the more rigid rule of the Cistercians, then recently 
introduced into England. 
"At Christmas," therefore, says Burton, " the Archbishop, 
being at Ripon, assigned to these monks some land in the 
patrimony of St. Peter, about three miles west of that place, 
for the erecting of a monastery. The spot of ground had 
never been inhabited, unless by wild beasts, being overgrown 
with woods and brambles, lying between two steep hills and 
rocks, covered with wood on all sides, more proper for a retreat 
for wild beasts than for the human species. . . . Richard, 
the Prior of St. Mary's at York, was chosen Abbot by the 
monks, being the first of this Monastery of Fountains ; with 
whom they withdrew into this uncouth desert, without any 
house to shelter them in that winter season, or provisions to 
subsist on, but entirely depending on Divine Providence. 
There stood a large Elm in the midst of the vale, on which 
they put some thatch or straw, and under that they lay, ate, 
and prayed ; the Bishop for a time supplying them with 
bread, and the rivulet with drink. But it is supposed that 
they soon changed the shelter of their Elm for that of seven 
Yew-trees growing on the declivity of the hill on the south 
side of the abbey ; all standing at this present time [1658], 
except the largest, which was blown down about the middle 
of the last century. They are of an extraordinary size ; the 
trunk of one of them is twenty-six feet six inches in circumference 
at the height of three feet from the ground; and 
they stand so near each other as to form a cover almost equal 
to a thatched roof. Under these trees, we are told by tradition, 
the monks resided till they built the monastery ; which 
seems to be very probable, if we consider how little a Yewtree 
increases in a year, and to what a bulk these are grown." 
(Burton, Monast., fob 141.) 
We have Pennant's measurements of one of these trees, 
taken in 1770, giving it a diameter of eight feet five inches, 
or 1212 lines. Hence, according to De Candolle's rule, it 
was then 1200 years old. 
The fine Yew at Dryburgh Abbey, which is supposed to 
have been planted when the abbey was founded, in 1136, and 
which is in full health and vigor, has a trunk only twelve feet 
in circumference ; its estimated age would, therefore, be less 
than six hundred years. 
The " Ankernyke Yew," near Staines, a witness of the conference 
between the English barons and King John, and in 
sight of which Magna Charta was signed (between Runnymede 
and Ankernyke House), and beneath whose shade the 
brutal Henry the Eighth first saw gospel light in Anna 
Boleyn's eyes, measures twenty-seven feet eight inches in circumference, 
and should therefore be 1100 years old, which is 
about the age that tradition assigns to it. The trunk of the 
"Darley Yew" in Derbyshire, having a mean diameter of 
nine feet five inches, would, by this rule, be 1356 years old. 
The Yew in Tisbury churchyard, Dorsetshire, the trunk of 
which measures thirty-seven feet in circumference, would now 
be almost 1600 years old. The same computation, applied 
to the " superannuated Yew-tree of Braburne churchyard, 
Kent," which, by the measurements of Evelyn himself and 
of Sir George Carteret, was fifty-eight feet eleven inches in 
circumference in the year 1660, would give it the respectable 
age of 2540 years at that time ! This tree has long ago disappeared. 
But it did not greatly exceed in size the Yew 
still extant in Fortingal churchyard, in Perthshire, Scotland, 
situated in a wild district among the Grampian Mountains, 
which forms a good collateral witness to the credibility of 
Evelyn's account. The trunk of the " Fortingal Yew " was 
fifty-two feet in circumference, when measured by the Hon. 
Daines Barrington in 1769 ; * or fifty-six feet six inches, according 
to Pennant's somewhat later measurement ; 2 the discrepancy 
being, no doubt, attributed to the fact that the two 
measurements were taken at different heights. In Barrington's 
time, the surface was nearly entire at the base, although 
upon one side all the interior had decayed. Afterwards, the 
cavity reached the opposite surface ; and the trunk at length 
separated into two distinct semicircular portions, dead and 
decaying within, but alive and growing at the circumference, 
between which the rustic funeral processions were long accustomed 
to pass on their way to the grave. In this condition 
it is figured by Strutt, as the first illustration of his " Sylva 
Scotica " ; but he has omitted to inform us when the sketch 
was taken. We suspect that it represents the tree as it appeared 
more than fifty years ago ; for, if we rightly apprehend 
the account given by the excellent Dr. Neill of Edinburgh, 
who visited the place in the summer of 1833, one of 
these half-trunks has now disappeared, with the exception of 
some decayed portions that scarcely rise above the soil ; but 
the other, which still shoots forth branches from the summit, 
i " Phil. Trans.," lix. p. 37. 
3 " Tours in Scotland," in Pinkerton's Gen. Coll., vol. iii. 
" gives a diameter of more than fifteen feet ; so that it is easy 
to conceive that the circumference of the bole, when entire, 
should have exceeded fifty feet." " Considerable spoliations," 
Dr. Neill further observes, " have evidently been committed 
on the tree since 1769 ; large arms have been removed, and 
masses of the trunk itself carried off by the country people, 
with the view of forming ' quechs ' or drinking -cups, and 
other relics, which visitors were in the habit of purchasing. 
Happily, further depredations have been prevented by means 
of an iron rail, which now surrounds the sacred spot ; and 
this venerable Yew, which in all probability was a flourishingtree 
at the commencement of the Christian era, may yet survive 
for centuries to come." l 
But we must not forget the typical representatives of the 
class of coniferous trees, the stately Pines and Firs ; several 
species of which attain a great size, and especially an unexampled 
height. Indeed, their mode of growth — their 
straight, regularly tapering trunks, carried steadily upwards 
by the continued prolongation of the leading shoot, as well as 
the small lateral extension of their branches — is extremely 
favorable to loftiness of stature, and to full development in the 
midst of the forest. In such trees our own country abounds. 
We need not dwell upon so familiar an object as our own 
White Pine, which, like Saul, " from his shoulders upwards, 
higher than any of the people," lifts its kingly form above its 
forest brethren, to the altitude of from one hundred and fifty 
to at least one hundred and eighty feet. 
" Not a prince, 
In all that proud old world beyond the deep, 
E'er wore his crown as loftily, as he 
Wears his green coronal of leaves." 
The White Pine is, par excellence, a New England tree, 
and has ever been identified with our commercial prosperity. 
The colonists of Massachusetts Bay, at a very early period, 
selected it as their cognizance, and when they first assumed 
the rights of a free people, they stamped its image on their 
coins. It does not seem to flourish on foreign soil ; as we 
1 Jameson's " Edinb. Phil. Jour." (1833), xv. p. 343. 
infer from Loudon's description, and the ill-favored figure 
which he gives as an illustration of its general appearance in 
English parks and pleasure-grounds ;1; 1 no less than from Gilpin's 
complaint of its " meagreness in foliage." 2 
Yet even the White Pine is overtopped by the Douglas 
Spruce (Pinus Douglasi), which forms the principal part of 
the gloomy forests of Oregon. The extraordinary height 
which this species attains was first recorded by Lewis and 
Clarke ; who state that the trunk is very commonly twentyseven, 
and often thirty-six feet, in circumference, at six feet 
above the earth's surface ; and rises to the height of two 
hundred and thirty feet — one hundred and twenty of that 
height without a limb. One which was measured by a member 
of their party is said to have been forty-two feet in girth, 
at a height beyond the reach of an ordinary man, and was 
estimated to reach the altitude of three hundred feet ! 3 This 
account, so far as respects the general height of the tree, has 
been amply confirmed by succeeding travelers, and especially 
by that enterprising botanist, the late Mr. Douglas, whose 
name the species bears, and to whom its discovery is generally 
attributed.* Mr. Douglas was really the first to make known 
the Lambert Pine {Pinus LambertiamP) to the scientific 
world ; a species which grows on the southern frontiers of 
Oregon Territory and in northern California ; the height of 
which is the more extraordinary, as the trees do not form a 
thick forest, but are rather sparsely scattered over the plains. 
i " Arb. Brit.," iv. p. 2881 f ., 2196. 
2 "Forest Scenery," i. p. 87. — The natural and economical history of 
this important tree has already been fully recorded on the pages of this 
Journal. Vol. xliv. p. 339, and vol. lviii. p. 300. 
3 " History of the Expedition of Lewis and Clarke," ii. p. 155. — More 
surprising still, and, as to the height compared with the diameter of 
the trunk, to us nearly incredible, is their account of a fallen tree of the 
same species on Wappatoo Island, which, they state. " measured 318 feet 
in length, although its diameter was only three feet!" (Op. cit. ii. 
p. 225.) 
* We have not found Lewis and Clarke's account anywhere cited or 
alluded to, except by the accurate (former) editor of the " American Almanac," 
in the volume for 1838, p. 108. 
To give our readers some idea of the hardships which this 
indefatigable collector endured, and the risks at which our 
nurseries have been stocked with the trees, and our gardens 
with the now familiar flowers of Oregon and California, we 
extract from the journal of Douglas a portion of the account 
of his visit to a group of these Lambert Pines ; merely remarking 
that it seems to afford a fair specimen of the perils 
which he continually incurred. Poor fellow !to have the life 
at last stamped out of him by a mad bullock in a pit, while 
pursuing his researches upon one of the Sandwich Islands ! 
" Thursday, the 25th. Weather dull, cold, and cloudy. 
When my friends in England are made acquainted with my 
travels, I fear they will think that I have told nothing but 
my miseries. This may be true ; but I now know, as they may 
do also, if they choose to come here on such an expedition, 
that the objects of which I am in quest cannot be obtained 
without labor, anxiety of mind, and no small risk of personal 
safety, of which latter statement my this day's adventures 
are an instance. I quitted my camp early in the morning, 
to survey the neighboring country, leaving my guide to 
take charge of the horses until my return in the evening, 
when I found that he had done as I wished, and in the interval 
dried some wet paper which I had desired him to put in 
order. About an hour's walk from my camp I met an Indian, 
who, on perceiving me, instantly strung his bow, placed 
on his left arm a sleeve of raccoon skin, and stood on the defensive. 
Being quite satisfied that this conduct was prompted 
by fear, and not by hostile intentions, the poor fellow having 
probably never seen such a being as myself before, I laid my 
gun at my feet on the ground, and waved my hand for him 
to come to me, which he did, slowly and with great caution. 
I then made him place his bow and quiver of arrows beside 
my gun, and, striking a light, gave him a smoke out of my 
own pipe, and a present of a few beads. With my pencil I 
made a rough sketch of the cone and Pine-tree which I 
wanted to obtain, and drew his attention to it, when he instantly 
pointed with his hand to the hills fifteen or twenty 
miles distant towards the south ; and when I expressed my 
intention of going thither, he cheerfully set about accompanying 
me. At mid-day I reached my long-wished-for Pines, and 
lost no time in examining them, and endeavoring to collect 
specimens and seeds. New and strange things seldom fail to 
make strong impressions, and are therefore frequently overrated 
; so that, lest I should never again see my friends in 
England to inform them verbally of this most beautiful and 
immensely grand tree, I shall here state the dimensions of 
the largest I could find among several that had been blown 
down by the wind. At three feet from the ground, its circumference 
is fifty-seven feet nine inches; at one hundred 
and thirty-four feet, seventeen feet five inches ; the extreme 
length two hundred and forty-five feet. 1 The trunks are 
commonly straight, and the bark remarkably smooth for such 
large timber, of a whitish or light-brown color, and yielding 
a great quantity of bright amber gum. The tallest stems are 
generally unbranched for two thirds of the height of the tree ; 
the branches rather pendulous, with cones hanging from their 
points, like sugar-loves in a grocer's shop. These cones are, 
however, only seen on the loftiest trees, and the putting myself 
in possession of three of these (all I could obtain) nearly 
brought my life to a close. As it was impossible either to 
climb the tree or hew it down, I endeavored to knock off the 
cones by firing at them with ball, when the report of my gun 
brought eight Indians, all of them painted with red earth, 
armed with bows, arrows, bone-tipped spears, and flint knives. 
They appeared anything but friendly. I endeavored to explain 
to them what I wanted, and they seemed satisfied, and 
sat down to smoke ; but presently I perceived one of them 
1 We take this to be the correct account. But, by an error in copying, 
as we suppose, the length of this same tree is given at only two hundred 
and fifteen feet, in the memoir inserted in the 16th volume of the " Transactions 
of the Linnsean Society " ; whence it has been copied into Lambert's 
great work on Pines, Loudon's Arboretum, the " American Almanac " 
for 1838, and Hooker's "Flora Boreali- Americana." There is another 
apparent discrepancy between the two accounts. In the Linnsean Transactions, 
the timber is said to be " white, soft, and light." In his .journal, 
Douglas says, the wood of the large tree he examined was " remarkably 
fine-grained and heavy." 
string his bow, and another sharpen his flint-knife with a pair 
of wooden pincers, and suspend it on the wrist of the right 
hand. Further testimony of their intention was unnecessary. 
To save myself by flight was impossible ; so, without hesitation, 
I stepped back about five paces, cocked my gun, drew 
one of the pistols out of my belt, and holding it in my left 
hand and the gun in my right, showed myself determined to 
fight for my life. As much as possible I endeavored to preserve 
my coolness ; and thus we stood looking at one another 
without making any movement or uttering a word for perhaps 
ten minutes, when one, at last, who seemed the leader, gave 
a sign that they wished for some tobacco : this I signified 
that they should have, if they fetched me a quantity of cones. 
They went off immediately in search of them, and no sooner 
were they all out of sight, than I picked up my three cones 
and some twigs of the trees, and made the quickest possible 
retreat, hurrying back to my camp, which I reached before 
dusk. The Indian who last undertook to be my guide to 
the trees, I sent off before gaining my encampment, lest he 
should betray me. How irksome is the darkness of night 
to one under my present circumstances ! I cannot speak a 
word to my guide, nor have I a book to divert my thoughts, 
which are continually occupied with the dread lest the hostile 
Indians should trace me hither and make an attack. I now 
write lying on the grass, with my gun cocked beside me, and 
penning these lines by the light of my Columbian candle, 
namely, an ignited piece of rosiny wood." (" Companion to 
Botanical Magazine," ii. pp. 130, 131.) 
It is to be regretted, although, under the circumstances, it 
is by no means surprising, that Mr. Douglas did not secure, 
at the time, complete data for ascertaining the age of the 
prostrate trunk he measured, which, as he states, was certainly 
not the largest he saw. But in a block from a smaller trunk, 
of the same species, he sent to England, " there are fifty-six 
annual layers in a space of four and a half inches next the 
outside." If we suppose the large tree to have grown at an 
equivalent rate throughout, it must have been 1400 years old 
when overthrown. But if it grew during the first century at 
the average rate of our White Pine for the same period, the 
estimate would be reduced to 1100 years ; which is probably 
much beneath the truth. 
But the most stately tree in North America — apparently 
an evergreen species of Taxodium or American Cypress — 
was subsequently observed by Douglas in Upper California. 
" This tree," he says, "gives the mountains a most peculiar, I 
was almost going to say, awful appearance — something which 
plainly tells that we are not in Europe. I have repeatedly 
measured specimens of this tree, two hundred and seventy 
feet long, and thirty-two feet round at three feet above the 
ground. Some few I saw upwards of three hundred feet 
high." 1 Truly these are trees, 
" to equal which the tallest pine, 
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast 
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand." 
This naturally brings us to the proper North American Cypress 
(Taxodium distichum) ; one of the largest and most 
remarkable trees of our southern States, but which appears 
to attain its most ample development in the tierras templadas 
of Mexico. Bartram gives a characteristic description of the 
tree. 
" It generally grows in the water, or in low flat lands, near 
the banks of great rivers and lakes, that are covered a great 
part of the year with two or three feet depth of water ; and 
that part of the trunk which is subject to be under water, 
and four or five feet higher up, is greatly enlarged by prodigious 
buttresses, or pilasters, which in full grown trees project 
out on every side to such a distance that several men 
might easily hide themselves in the hollows between. Each 
pilaster terminates uuder ground in a very large, strong, 
serpentine root, which strikes off and branches every way 
just under the surface of the earth ; and from these roots 
grow woody cones, called Cypress-knees, four, five, and six 
feet high, and from six to eighteen inches and two feet in 
diameter at their bases. The larger ones are hollow, and 
1 Journal of Douglas's second visit to the Columbia, etc., in Hooker, 
" Compan. to Bot. Mag.," ii. p. 150. 
serve very well for bee-hives ! A small space of the tree itself 
is hollow, nearly as high as the buttresses already mentioned. 
From this place the tree, as it were, takes another 
beginning, forming a great, straight column, eighty or ninety 
feet high ; when it divides every way around into an extensive, 
flat, horizontal top, like an umbrella, where eagles have 
their secure nests, and cranes and storks their temporary resting-places. 
And what adds to the magnificence of their appearance 
is the streamers of long moss that hang from the 
lofty limbs, and float in the winds." (Bartram's "Travels 
through Carolina, Georgia, etc.," p. 91.) 
In favorable situations, the tree sometimes attains the 
height of one hundred and twenty, or one hundred and forty 
feet, and a circumference of from twenty to forty feet, when 
measured quite above the singular dilated base. This is 
scarcely exceeded by the largest of the celebrated Cypresses 
in the gardens of Chapultepec, at Mexico, called the " Cypress 
of Montezuma," and which was already a remarkable tree in 
the palmy days of that unfortunate monarch, three and a 
half centuries ago. The girth of its trunk is forty-one feet, 
according to Mr. Ward, 1 or about forty-five, according to Mr. 
Exter ; but its height is so great in proportion, that the 
whole mass appears light and graceful. 
But this tree is greatly surpassed by the famous "Ahuehuete 
" (the Mexican name for the species) of the village of 
Atlisco, in the intendancy of Puebla, which was first described 
by Lorenzana from personal observation. The worthy Archbishop 
says that "the cavity of the trunk" —for the tree is 
hollow "might contain twelve or thirteen men on horseback 
; and that, in the presence of the most illustrious Archbishop 
of Guatemala and the Bishop of Puebla, more than a 
hundred boys entered it." 2 The girth of the trunk, according 
to Humboldt, is a little over twenty-three metres, or seventysix 
English feet, and the diameter of the cavity about sixteen 
feet. 3 
1 "Travels in Mexico," ii. p. 230. 
2 Note to the Third Despatch of Cortes. This note is not found in 
Mr. Folsom's translation. 
3 " Essai Polit. Nouv. Esp.," ed. 2, ii. p. 54. 
Still more gigantic — the Nestor of the race, if not of the 
whole vegetable kingdom —is the Cypress which stands in 
the churchyard of the village of Santa Maria del Tule, in the 
intendancy of Oaxaca, two and a half leagues east of that 
city, on the road to Guatemala by the way of Tehuantepec. 
In its neighborhood there are five or six other trees of the 
kind, which are nearly as large as the " Cypress of Montezuma," 
but which this one as much surpasses as that does 
the ordinary denizens of the forest. We possess three independent 
measurements of this enormous trunk. The first is 
that given by Humboldt, who states, probably on the authority 
of his informant, M. Anza, that the trunk is thirty-six 
metres (one hundred and eighteen English feet) in circumference. 
In the year 1827, Mr. Poinsett, then our minister 
at the court of Mexico, transmitted to the American Philosophical 
Society at Philadelphia a cord which represented the 
exact circumference of this tree. Its extraordinary length 
naturally excited some doubts as to the correctness of the 
measurement ; and immediate application was made to Mr. 
Poinsett for further particulars. He accordingly transmitted 
a communication from Mr. Exter,an English traveler who had 
just returned from Oaxaca, and who had carefully examined 
the tree in question. Mr. Exter's letter was afterwards published 
in Loudon's "Magazine of Natural History"; and a 
French translation, accompanied by some interesting comments 
hy the younger De Candolle, appeared in the " Bibliotheque 
Universelle" for 1831. 1 According to Mr. Exter's 
measurement, the trunk is forty-six varus — one hundred 
and twenty-two English feet —in circumference ; which is 
nearly in accordance with Humboldt's account. In neither 
case is the height at which the trunk was measured expressly 
mentioned. But this point has been duly attended to by a 
recent scientific observer, M. Galeotti, who visited this cele- 
brated tree in 1839 and in 1840, and whose careful measurement 
gives to the trunk the circumference of one hundred 
and five French (equal to one hundred and twelve English) 
i Tom. xlvi., p. 387. 
feet, at the height of four feet above the surface of the soil. 1 
The previous measurements, therefore, were taken somewhat 
nearer the base. The tree as yet shows no signs of decay, 
although it bears less foliage in proportion to its size than 
its younger fellows. But we find no authority for Mr. Exter's 
statement, that this tree was mentioned by Cortes, and that 
its shade once afforded shelter to his whole European army. 
Perhaps he had in some way confounded it in his memory 
with a Cypress which the Conquistador passed on the march 
to Mexico, and which is still traditionally associated with 
his name. 2 
Mr. Exter reports, and the observations of recent travelers 
to some extent confirm the statement, that there are Cypresses 
near the ruins of Palenque, equal in size to the tree at Santa 
Maria del Tide. If this be so, they may claim a much higher 
antiquity than the ruins they overshadow. They must have 
witnessed the rise, the flourishing existence, the decline, and 
the final extinction of a race whose whole history has sunk 
into oblivion ; while they are still alive. 
By what means can we ascertain the age of large Cypresstrees 
? Some years since, when Professor Alphonse De Candolle 
— the son and worthy successor of the botanist who has 
rendered that name illustrious — attempted to answer this 
question, the only evidence within his reach was drawn from 
the rate at which trees of the kind had grown in France during 
half a century. He inferred that the American Cypress, in 
its early days, increases at the rate of about a foot in diameter 
every fifty years ; and the estimate, although surely much too 
low for trees planted in favorable open situations (which have 
even been known to add annually an inch to their diameter 
for a series of years, both in Europe and in the United States), 
is yet quite as high as our own observations will allow for 
those which grow in their native forests. This rate would 
give to the Cypress of Montezuma the age of about seven centuries, 
and would render that at Oaxaca scarcely coeval wdth 
1 " Bulletin de l'Acad. Roy. des Sciences de Bruxelles," 1843, torn. x. 
p. 123. 
2 See Prescott's " History of the Conquest," i. p. 404. 
the Christian era. Perhaps this is as great an age as we are 
warranted in assuming for the Cypress of Montezuma ; but 
old trunks increase so much the more slowly as they advance 
in age, that we must certainly assign a vastly higher antiquity 
to the trees of Atlisco and Santa Maria del Tule. Yet far 
the most important element in the calculation is wanting; 
namely, the actual present rate of growth of these monstrous 
trunks, or of other old trees of the same species. In default 
of this essential evidence, De Candolle has instituted a comparison 
between these trees and the famous Baobabs of Senegal, 
upon which we place no great reliance, but from which 
he infers that the great Cypress of Santa Maria del Tule, if 
really the growth of a single trunk, is from four to six thousand 
years old, and perhaps dates its existence as far back as 
the actual creation of the world. 1 
We trust that the next intelligent traveler who visits this 
most ancient living monument, or any other Cypress of remarkable 
size, will not fail to complete the evidence that is 
needed, as the full solution of this curious problem may throw 
light upon some interesting questions respecting the physical 
history of the world. One or more lateral incisions, not at 
all endangering the existence of the tree, would at once reveal 
its actual growth for the last few centuries. And if made at 
proper points, and carried to a sufficient depth, they might 
enable the judicious operator to disprove or confirm the surmise, 
that this huge bole may consist of the trunks of two or 
three original trees, long since united and blended into one. 
This conjecture is by no means very improbable, although 
there is nothing in the external appearance of the trunk to 
confirm it. 2 
Meanwhile, the Cypresses of our southern States, although 
of more moderate dimensions, afford important assistance in 
this inquiry. It is generally known that old trees of the 
1 Alphonse De Candolle, in " Bibl. Univ.," xlvi. p. 393. Aug. Pyr. De 
Candolle, " Phys. Veg.," ii. p. 1000. 
2 In opposition to the remark of M. Anza, cited by Humboldt (Essai 
Polit, the Engl, transl., ii. p. 190), we may adduce the account of Mr. 
Exter, and the negative testimony of M. Galeotti. 
kind grow very slowly ; but there are no accounts on record, 
so far as we can learn, respecting their rate of growth. Our 
own observations, though not so extended as could be wished, 
incline us to adopt the standard which De Candolle assumed 
for the Yew ; namely, the twelfth of an inch for the annual 
increase of old Cypresses in diameter, when growing in their 
native forests. But we would only apply this rule to trunks 
of large size, and with all the precautions that have already 
been mentioned ; for the Cypress grows, or at least may grow, 
quite rapidly for the first century or two ; but when old, it 
appears to increase quite as slowly as the Yew. We have 
counted sixty layers of the wood in the space of an inch. A 
fine section of a Cypress-trunk, which grew near Wilmington, 
in North Carolina, now lies before us, which, on an average 
radius of twenty-seven inches, or diameter of fifty-four inches, 
exhibits six hundred and seventy annual layers. It has, 
therefore, grown throughout at the average rate of less than 
the twenty-fourth of an inch a year, measured on the radius, 
or the twelfth of an inch on the diameter. The trunk was 
thirteen inches in diameter at the expiration of its first century, 
and twenty-seven inches about the close of the second ; 
it added seven inches to its diameter during the third century, 
and a nearly equal amount during the fourth; and for the 
remaining three hundred and seventy years, it grew at a still 
slower, but, on the whole, nearly equable rate. 
Now it is deemed a safe mode, as we have already shown, 
to employ the rate of growth deduced from comparatively 
young trees for the determination of the age of larger and 
older trunks of the same species. Not only is our estimate, 
in all such cases, likely to fall below the truth, but the larger 
the trunk in question the less the danger of exaggeration. 
Let us apply to the Mexican Cypresses the data furnished 
by our Wilmington tree. If the Cypress of Montezuma has 
grown, on the average, even a little more rapidly than the 
trunk before us, — has increased in diameter at the mean rate 
of an inch in twelve years, — it must now be fully two thousand 
years old. But if we suppose it to have grown at twelve 
times this rate (which is the maximum for young Cypresses 
under the most favorable circumstances) during the whole 
of the first century, we should thereby reduce the estimated 
age to a thousand years. By the same computation, the Cypress 
at Atlisco would be 3480 years old ; or 2390 years, if 
we allow it the maximum rate of growth for the first century. 
So, likewise, the great Cypress at Santa Maria del Tule would 
be 5124 years of age, or 4024 years, with the aforesaid deduction. 
The latter accords perfectly with De Candolle's 
minimum estimate ; and it is the lowest age that, in the present 
state of our knowledge, can possibly be assigned to this 
prodigious tree, upon the supposition that its trunk is really 
single. 
We are obliged to pass unnoticed those trees of unknown 
species, but of surprising size, which the learned and enthusiastic 
Professor Martius visited in the interminable woods 
that border the Amazon, and of which he has recently published 
such a spirited account. 1 Their trunks were so huge 
that the outstretched arms of fifteen men were required to 
grasp them ; and so lofty, as to mock every effort for obtaining 
even a leaf or flower, by which the species might be determined. 
As to their age, Martius offers only a conjectural 
estimate. 
The Baobab, or Monkey-Bread (Adansonia digitataS), of 
Senegal and the Cape de Verde Islands, has long afforded 
the most celebrated instances of vegetable longevity. The 
tree is remarkable for the small height which it attains, compared 
with the diameter of the trunk or the length of its 
branches. Trunks which are seventy or eighty feet in circumference 
rise to the height of only ten or twelve feet, when 
they divide into a great number of extremely large branches, 
fifty or sixty feet in length, which, spreading widely in every 
direction, form a hemisphere or hillock of verdure, perhaps 
one hundred and fifty feet in diameter, and only seventy in 
elevation. To this peculiarity, rather than to the nature of 
the wood, which is light and soft, the great longevity of the 
tree is probably owing, its form opposing an effectual resist- 
1 " Flora Brasiliensis," Tab. Physiog., ix. ; " Arbores ante Christum 
nafcum enatas." 
ance to the tempests which would overthrow ordinary trees. 
Its roots spread in a similar manner beneath the soil. When 
laid bare by a torrent that has washed away the earth, they 
have been traced to a distance of more than a hundred feet 
without reaching their extremity. The history of these Baobabs, 
possibly of the very trees which Adanson's account has 
rendered famous, reaches back to the discovery of that part 
of the African coast, and of the Cape de Verde Islands, by 
Cadamosto, in 1455 ; who, in his narrative, mentions the singular 
disproportion between the height and the girth of these 
trees. 1 But they were first fully described by the French 
naturalist Adanson, who examined them about a century ago. 
The largest trunks that Adanson measured were eighty-five 
feet in circumference, or twenty-seven in diameter. Golberry 
is said to have measured one that was over a hundred feet in 
girth. Quite recently, M. Perrottet has met with many Baobabs 
in Senegambia, varying from sixty to ninety feet in circumference, 
yet still in a green old age, and showing no signs 
of decrepitude. There can be no doubt, therefore, respecting 
the prodigious size which these trees attain ; and there is 
great reason to believe that they are among the oldest denizens 
of our planet. Indeed, their age is plausibly estimated 
at five or six thousand years. And the younger De Candolle 
has placed so much confidence in this estimate that he has 
employed it as a standard of comparison in the case of the 
Mexican Cypresses which we have just considered. If the 
evidence were really as direct as is generally thought, we could 
interpose no serious objection to such a conclusion. But a 
critical examination proves that the whole account given by 
recent writers, upon Adanson's authority, is strangely at 
variance with his own statements. 
The current narrative is substantially and briefly as follows:—that 
Adanson observed, at the Madelaine Islands, 
near Cape de Verde, some Baobab-trees of thirty feet in 
1 " Arbores vero ibi sunt tantse magnitudinis, ut earum ambitus sit 
pedum xvii, licet eminentia altitudinis non quadret magnitudini ; non 
enim altius tolluntur quam pedes XX," etc. (A. Cadamusti, Navig., c. 
xliii., in Grynseus, Nov. Orb., p. 45.) 
diameter, upon the trunks of which he found inscriptions that 
had been made by former visitors three centuries before ; 
that, by cutting through three hundred annual layers, he discovered 
the vestiges of these inscriptions upon the wood, thus 
proving that they were actually made at the date assigned ; 
that, by measuring the thickness of these layers, he ascertained 
the actual increase of the trunk during the last three 
centuries ; that, having thus obtained the rate of growth in 
old age, and having, by actual inspection of young trunks, 
learned the rate of growth during the first hundred years, he 
deduced from these combined data the almost inevitable conclusion, 
that the trees in question were five or six thousand 
years old. 1 
Let us compare this with Adanson's own statements, from 
which it purports to have been taken. His first account, 
which comprises all the principal facts in the case, is given 
in the "Voyage au Senegal," prefixed to his volume on natural 
history of that country, which was published soon after 
his return to France, in 1753. Adanson simply relates, that, 
on his visit to the Madelaine Islands, he found Baobab-trees 
of five or six feet in diameter, which bore European names 
and dates, deeply engraven upon the bark. Two of these he 
took the trouble to renew, one of which was dated in the fifteenth, 
the other in the sixteenth century. The characters 
were about six inches in length, and as in breadth they occupied 
but a small part of the circumference of the trunk, 
Adanson reasonably inferred that they were not engraven in 
the early youth of these trees. Pie had previously seen, on 
the island of Senegal, trees of the kind, which were sixtythree 
and sixty-five feet in circumference ; but he does not 
intimate that he inspected the layers of wood in any case. 
He merely remarks that these inscriptions might furnish 
some evidence respecting the age which Baobabs sometimes 
attained ; " For," says he, " if we suppose that the inscriptions 
were engraven even in the early years of these trees, and that 
1 See Alphonse De Candolle, in " Bibl. Univ.," xlvi. p. 389. (Aug. 
Pyr. De Candolle, Phys. Veg., ii. p. 1003. Moquin-Taiidon, Teratol. Veg 
p. 107.) <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:51:44 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

below the truth. As to its rate of growth when young, he 
states that the tree acquires the diameter of an inch or an 
inch and a half in the first year ; the diameter of a foot in ten 
years, and about a foot and a half in thirty years ; but so far 
from having extended these data, and employed them in the 
manner which is attributed to him, he says, that, although it 
might be desirable thus to employ them, a sound geometry 
teaches that they are quite insufficient for the purpose. 
Hence, instead of attempting any precise determination, he 
merely offers the probable conjecture, that these largest 
Baobabs may have been in existence several thousand years, 
or nearly from the period of the universal deluge ; which 
would give them a claim to be considered the most ancient 
living monuments in the world. 1 
We cannot learn that Adanson ever made any further 
statements upon the subject ; and, as he never revisited the 
African coast, he cannot have collected additional facts. His 
original writings plainly show that he never pretended to 
have obtained the data and made the estimates which have 
so long been attributed to him. To whom belongs the credit 
of falsifying his testimony we are unable to ascertain, as the 
authors above mentioned do not cite their immediate authority 
; — perhaps to one M. Duchesne, whose name the elder 
De Candolle has casually alluded to, as having drawn up a 
table, exhibiting the diameter of the Baobab at different 
periods, doubtless upon the very plan that Adanson pointed 
out and condemned. We are only surprised that such accurate 
and judicious writers as the De Candolles, father and 
son, should have relied upon second-hand authorities in any 
case where the originals were accessible, and especially in 
what they term " the most celebrated case of extreme longevity 
that has yet been observed with precision." 2 
1 "Mem. Acad. Sciences," 1761, p. 231 ; and "Eneycl. SuppL," vol. 
i. p. 798. 
2 A passage which has met our eye in Mirbel's " EleXens de Physiologie 
Vdgelale," i. p. 116, shows that no such data as those which have 
been, as we suppose, falsely assumed, were known to that author down 
to the year 1815. 
We close our enumeration, already too protracted, with a 
case of longevity, perhaps transcending that of the oldest 
Baobabs, or of the Mexican Cypresses ; namely, the famous 
Dragon-tree (Draccena Draco') of the city of Orotava, in 
Teneriffe. This tree has been visited by many competent 
observers ; and among others, by that prince of scientific 
travelers, the veteran Humboldt, who has given a good figure 
of it, as it appeared about seventy years ago, from a drawing 
made by M. Ozonne in 1776. A later and much fuller account 
was published about twenty years since, by M. Berthelot 
1 who has assiduously devoted many years to the study of 
the civil and natural history of the Canary Islands ; and a 
fine figure of the mutilated trunk, as it appeared after the 
terrible storm of the 21st of July, 1819, forms one of the 
most striking pictorial illustrations of that elaborate and excellent 
work, the " Histoire Naturelle des lies Canaries," by 
P. Barker Webb, Esq., and M. Berthelot. 
The trunk is by no means equal in size to some of the trees 
already noticed. It is only fifty feet in girth at the base, and 
not more than sixty or seventy in elevation. But, at the discovery 
of Teneriffe in 1402, nearly four and a half centuries 
ago, this Dragon-tree was nearly as large as at the present 
day, and had been immemorially an object of veneration 
among the Guanches. After the conquest, at the close of the 
fifteenth century, the trunk was employed as a boundary in 
dividing the lands, and as such is mentioned in ancient documents. 
It had changed very little since that period, except 
that the centre had been hollowed by slow decay, until the 
summer of 1819, when a third of its spreading top was carried 
away by a tempest. But it still continues to vegetate ; and 
its remaining branches are still annually crowned, —as they 
have been each returning autumn, perhaps for hundreds of 
centuries, with its beautiful clusters of white, lily-like blossoms, 
— emblems of " the eternal youth of nature." 
The Dragon-tree, like its allies the Palms, and unlike 
ordinary trees, does not increase in diameter by annual concentric 
layers. The usual means of investigation are here of 
1 In " Nova Acta Acad. Nat. Cur.," xiii., 1827, p. 781. 
no account ; and, apart from historic evidence, we can only 
form a somewhat conjectural estimate of the age of this celebrated 
trunk, by a comparison with young trees of the same 
species, which are known to grow with extreme slowness. 
M. Berthelot, who has attempted the comparison ' under the 
most favorable circumstances, -—having lived many years upon 
the island, — declares that the calculations which he has 
made, upon the supposition that the trunk has increased in 
size even at the rate of young Dragon-trees up to within the 
last eight hundred or one thousand years, have more than 
once confounded his imagination. We cannot but assign the 
very highest antiquity to a tree like this, which the storms 
and casualties of four centuries have scarcely changed. 
Upon the whole, we cannot resist the conclusion, that many 
trees have far survived what we are accustomed to consider 
their habitual duration ; that even in Europe, where man has 
so often and so extensively changed the face of the soil, as 
his wants or caprices have dictated, some trees, favored by 
fortune, have escaped destruction for at least one or two thousand 
years ; while in other, and particularly in some tropical 
countries, either on account of a more favorable climate, or 
because they have been more respected, or haply more neglected, 
by the inhabitants, a few may with strong probability 
be traced back to twice that period ; and, perhaps, almost to 
that epoch which the monuments both of history and geology 
seem to indicate as that of the last great revolution of the 
earth's surface. After making every reasonable allowance 
for errors of observation and too sanguine inference, and 
assuming, in the more extraordinary cases, those estimates 
which give minimum results, we must still regard some of 
these trees, not only as the oldest inhabitants of the globe, 
but as more ancient than any human monument, —as exhibiting 
a living antiquity, compared with which the mouldering 
relics of the earliest Egyptian civilization, the pyramids themselves, 
are but structures of yesterday. 
THE FLORA OF JAPAN. 
It is interesting to notice that, notwithstanding the comparative 
proximity of Japan to western North America, 
fewer of its species are represented there than in far distant 
Europe. Also, — showing that this difference is not owing 
to the separation by an ocean, — that far more Japanese 
plants are represented in eastern North America than in 
either. It is, indeed, possible that my much better knowledge 
of American botany than of European may have somewhat 
exaggerated this result in favor of Atlantic North America 
as against Europe, but it could not as against western North 
America* 
If we regard the identical species only, in the several floras, 
the preponderance is equally against western as compared with 
eastern North America, but is more in favor of Europe. For 
the number of species in the Japanese column 2 which likewise 
occur in western North America is about 120 ; in eastern 
North America, 134 ; in Europe, 157. 
Of the 580 Japanese entries, there are which have corresponding 

European representatives, a little above 0.48 per cent. ; of 
identical species, 0,27. 
Western North American representatives, about 0.37 per 
cent. ; of identical species, 0.20. 
1 Extract from the concluding part of a " Memoir on the Botany of 
Japan, in its relations to that of North America, and of other parts of 
the Northern Temperate Zone." (Memoirs of the American Academy 
of Arts and Science, new series, vi. 1859.) 
It is this paper which fixed the attention of the scientific world upon 
Professor Gray and established his reputation as a philosophical naturalist. 
— C. S. S. 
2 The column in a tabular view of the distribution of Japanese plants 
and their nearest allies in the northern temperate zone. 
Eastern North American representatives, about 0.61 per 
cent. ; of identical species, 0.23. 
So geographical continuity favors the extension of identical 
species ; but still eastern North America has more in common 
with Japan than western North America has. 
The relations of this kind between the floras of Japan and 
of Europe are obvious enough ; and the identical species are 
mostly such as extend continuously — as they readily may — 
throughout Russian Asia, some few only to the eastern confines 
of Europe, but most of them to its western borders. To 
exhibit more distinctly the features of identity between the 
floras of Japan and of North America, and also the manner 
in which these are distributed between the eastern and western 
portions of our continent, — after excluding those species 
which range around the world in the northern hemisphere, 
or the greater part of it, or (which is nearly the same thing 
in the present view) which are unknown in Europe, — I will 
enumerate the remaining peculiar species which Japan pos- 
sesses in common with America: — 
In Japan. In W. N. America. In E. N. America. 
Anemone Pennsylvania , A. Pennsylvanica 
(Coptis asplenifolia ?) C. asplenifolia 
(Trautvetteria palmata) T. palmata T. palmata 
Caulophyllum thalietroides 
C. thalictroides 
Diphylleia cymosa D. cymosa 
Brasenia peltata (B. peltata) B. peltata 
Geranium erianthum G. erianthum 
Rhus Toxicodendron R. Toxicodendron, var. R. Toxicodendron 
Vitis Labrusca (Thunb.) V. Labrusca 
V. Labrusca 
Thermopsis fabacea T. fabacea 
Prunus Virginiana ? P- Virginiana 
Spiraa betulajfolia S. betuhefolia S. betulsefolia 
Photiuia arbutifolia, in 
Bonin. P. arbutifolia 
Pyrus rivularis ? P. rivularis 
Ribes laxiflorum R. laxiflorum 
(Penthorum sedoides, 
China) P. sedoides 
Cryptotenia Canadensis C. Canadensis 
Heracleum lanatum H. lanatum H. lanatum 
(Archemora rigida ?) 
(Archangelica Gmelini) 
Cymopterus littoralis ? 
Osmorrhiza longistylis 
Eehiuopanax horridus 
Aralia quinquefolia 
Cornus Canadensis 
Viburnam plicatum 
*Achillea Sibirica 
* Artemisia borealis 
Vaccinium macrocarpon 
Menziesia ferruginea 
(Bosclmiakia glabra ?) 
*Pleurogyne rotata 
(Asarum Canadense ?) 
*Polygonum Bistorta 
Rumex persicarioides 
Liparis liliifolia 
Pogonia ophioglossoides 
Iris setosa 
Trillium erectum, var. 
(Smilacina trifolia) 
Polygonatum giganteum 
(Streptopus roseus) 
Veratum viride 
Juncus xiphioides 
(Cyperus Iria) 
Carex rostrata 
Carex stipata 
Carex macrocephala 
Sporobolus elongatus 
Agrostis scabra 
Festuca pauciflora 
Adiantum pedatum 
Onoclea sensibilis 
Osmnnda cinnamomea 
Lycopodium lucidulum 
(Lycopodium dendroi- 
deum) 
A. Gmelini 
C. littoralis 
0. longistylis 
E. horridus 
C. Canadensis 
*A. Sibirica 
*A. borealis 
V. macrocarpon 
M. ferruginea 
B. glabra 
*P. rotata 
P. Bistorta 
R. persicarioides 
*L setosa 
S. roseus 
V. viride 
J. xiphioides 
C. stipata 
C. macrocephala 
S. elongatus 
A. scabra 
F. pauciflora 
A. pedatum 
L. dendroideum 
A. rigida 
A. Gmelini 
O. longistylis 
A. quinquefolia 
C. Canadensis 
V. plicatum (lantanoides) 
*A. borealis 
V. macrocarpon 
M. ferruginea 
*P. rotata 
A. Canadense 
R. persicarioides 
L. liliifolia 
P. ophioglossoides 
T. erectum 
S. trifolia 
P. giganteum 
S. roseus 
V. viride 
C. Iria 
C. rostrata 
C. stipata 
S. elongatus 
A. scabra 
A. pedatum 
O. sensibilis 
O. cinnamomea 
L. lucidulum 
L. dendroideum 
The names inclosed in parentheses are of species which I 
have not seen from Japan : some of them inhabit the adjacent 
mainland ; some are imperfectly identified. Those marked * 
are high northern species in America. 
Of these fifty-six extra-European species, thirty five inhabit 
western, and forty-one eastern North America. And fifteen 
are western and not eastern ; twenty-one eastern and not 
western ; and twenty common to both sides of the continent. 
Eight or ten of these fifty-six species extend eastward into 
the interior of Asia. 
On the other hand, the only species which I can mention 
as truly indigenous both to Japan and to Europe, but not 
recorded as ranging through Asia, are : — 
Euonymus latifolius, Valeriana dioica, Pyrola media, 
Fagus sylvatica, Streptopus amplexifolius, Blechnum spicant, 
Athyrium fontanum. 
Two of these species extend across the northern part of the 
American continent and on to the Asiatic ; another occurs on 
the northwest coast of America ; and another, the Fagus, is 
represented in eastern America by a too closely related species. 
It is noteworthy that not one of these seven plants is 
of a peculiarly European genus, or even a Europseo-Siberian 
genus ; while of the fifty-six species of the Americo-Japanese 
region wanting in Europe, twenty are of the extra-European 
genera, seventeen are of genera restricted to the North 
American, east Asian, and Himalayan regions (except that 
Brasenia has wandered to Australia) ; fourteen of the genera 
(most of them monotypic) are peculiar to America and Japan 
or the districts immediately adjacent ; one is peculiar to our 
northwest coast and Japan ; and eight are monotypic genera 
wholly peculiar (Brasenia excepted) to the Atlantic United 
States and Japan. Add to these the similar cases of other 
American species (nearly all of them particularly Atlantic- 
American) which have been detected in the Himalayas or in 
northern Asia, — such as Menispermum Canadense (Dauricum, 
DO), Amphicarpcem monoica ? Clitoria Mariana, 
Osmorrhiza brevistylis, Monotropa uniflora, Phryma leptostachya, 
Tipularia discolor f etc., — and it will be almost impossible 
to avoid the conclusion that there has been a peculiar 
intermingling of the eastern American and eastern Asian 
floras, which demands explanation. 
The case might be made yet stronger by reckoning some 
subgeneric types as equivalent to generic in the present view. 
and by distinguishing those species or genera which barely 
enter the eastern borders of Europe; e. g., Cimicifuga fcetida, 
Mmnringia lateriflora, Geum strictum, Spirasa salicifolia, 
etc. 
It will be yet more strengthened, and the obvious conclu- 
sion will become irresistible, when we take the nearly allied, 
as well as the identical, species into account. And also when 
we consider that, after excluding the identical species, only 
fifteen per cent, of the entries in the European column of the 
detailed tabular view are in italic type (i. e. are closely representative 
of Japanese species) ; while there are twenty-two 
per cent, of this character in the American column. 
For the latter, I need only advert to some instances of such 
close representation, as of 
Trollius patulus by T. Amerieanus, 
Aguilegia Burgeriana "A. Canadensis, 
Rhus vernicifera " R. venenata, 
Celastras seandens " C. articulatus, 
Negundo cissifolium " N. aceroides, 
Sophora Japonica " S. affinis, 
Sanguisorba tennifolia ......" S. Canadensis, 
Astilbe Thunbergii and Japonica . . " A. decandra, 
Mitehella undulata " M. repens, 
Hamamelis Japonica " H. Virginiea, 
Clethra barbinervis " C. acuminata, 
Rhododendron brachycarpum . . . . " R. Catawbiense, 
Amsonia elliptica " TabernEemontana, 
Saururus Loureiri " S. cernuus, 
and many others of the same sort, — several of which, when 
better known, may yet prove to be conspecific ; while an 
equally large number could be indicated of species which, 
altogether more positively different, are yet no less striking 
counterparts. 
To demonstrate the former proposition, I have only to 
contrast the extra- American genera common to Europe and 
Japan with the extra-European genera common to North 
America and Japan. The principal European genera of this 
category are Adonis, Epimedium, Chelidonium, Malachium, 
Lotus, Anthriscus, Hedera, Asperula, Rubia, Carpesium, Ligularia, 
Lampsana, Picris, Psederota, Ajuga, Thymus, Nepeta, 
Lamium, Ligustrum, Kochia? Daphne, Thesium, Buxus, 
Mercurialis, Cephalanthera, Paris, Asparagus, —to which 
may as well be added Pseonia and Bupleurum, the former 
having a representative on the mountains, and the latter in 
the arctic regions, of western America, but both absent from 
the rest of our continent. Excepting Psederota and Buxus 
(the latter a rather doubtful native of eastern Asia), none 
of these genera are peculiar to Europe, but all extend 
throughout Asia and elsewhere over large parts of the world. 
The following incomplete list of North American genera 
or peculiar subgeneric types represented in Japan and its 
vicinity, but unknown in Europe, presents a very different 
appearance. Those which are absent from the flora of western 
North America are italicized. 
Trautvetteria Philadelphus Asarum, § Heterolropa 
Cimicifuga (barely Penthorum Phytolacca 
reaches Europe) " Hamamelis Benzoin and Sassafras f 
Illidum Liquidambar Tatranthera 
Magnolia Cryptotcenia Saururus 
Cocculus and Meni- Cymopterus ? Pachysandra 
spermum? Archemora Laportea 
Mahonia Osmorrhiza PUea 
Caulophyllum Aralia and § Ginseng Bcelimeria 
Diphylleia Echinopanax Microptelea 
Brasenia Diervilia Madura 
Nelumbium Mitchella Juglans 
Dicentra Oldenlandia Abies, § Tsuga 
Stuartia (& Gordoniaf) (Siegesbeckia, in Chamascyparis 
Zanthoxylum Mexico) Torrea 
Cissus Cacalia (reaches Anscema 
Ampelopsis E. Europe) A.rctiodracon 
Berchemia Gaultheria Pogoma 
Jfecnlns Leucolhoe Arethusa 
Sapmdus Pieris Dioscorea 
Negundo Clethra Kleins 
Thermopsis Menziesia Coprosmantlms 
Wistaria Symplocos Trillium 
Desmodium Ardisia Chntoma 
Lespedeza Boschniakia Streptopus, § Hekon- 
Rhynchosia Catalpa ma 
Sophora Tecoma Chamwlirium t 
Photinia Dicliptera Sporobolus 
Leptandra 
Callicarpa 
Cedronella 
Amsonia 
Arundinaria 
Adiantum 
Onoclea 
Astilbe 
Mitella 
Hydrangea 
Ilea 
Here are about ninety extra-European genera or forms, 
sixty-four of which are absent from western North America 
out of the tropics (the latter comprising a very large part of 
the most striking representative species), and almost as many 
more are divided between North America and extra^tropical 
(chiefly northern and eastern) Asia. About forty of the 
latter genera are groups of single, or of two or few closely 
related species, peculiar, or nearly peculiar, to tire regions 
just mentioned. 
This list should be supplemented by those additional North 
American genera which have one or more closely representative 
species in the Himalayan region only, such as Podophyllum, 
Pyrularia, etc. ; and also by the numerous cases in 
which eastern American plants are represented in the Hima 
layo-Japanese region by strikingly cognate, although not congeneric 
species ; such as our Macrotys by Pityrosperma ; 
Schizandra by Kadsura and Sphserostema ; Neviusia by 
Kerria and Rhodotypus ; Calycanthus by Chimonanthus ; 
Cornus florida by Benthamia ; Prosartes by Disporum ; 
Helonias by Heloniopsis ; and so of others, which have been 
mentioned in the former part of this memoir, and exhibited 
in the accompanying tabular view. % 
I had long ago, in Silliman's Journal, presented some data 
illustrative of this remarkable parallelism, and also more recently 
in my " Statistics of the Flora of the Northern United 
States " (vol. xxii., second series) ; where I had noticed the 
facts, — (1) that a large percentage of our extra-European 
types are shared with eastern Asia ; and (2) that no small 
part of these are unknown in v/estern North America. But 
Mr. Bentham was first to state the natural conclusion from all 
these data, — though I know not if he has even yet published 
the remark, — namely, that the interchange between the temperate 
floras even of the western part of the Old World and 
of the New has mainly taken place via Asia. Notwithstand- 
ing the few cases which point in the opposite direction (e. g. 
Eriocaulon septangulare, Spartina, Subularia, Betula alba), 
the general statement will be seen to be well sustained. Also, 
in the "Journal of the Proceedings of the Linnsean Society," 
u. p. 34, Mr. Bentham " calls to mind how frequently large 
American genera (such as Eupatorium, Aster, Solidago, Solatium, 
etc.) are represented in eastern Asia by a small number 
of species, which gradually diminish or altogether disappear 
as we proceed westward toward the Atlantic limits of Europe ; 
whilst the types peculiar to the extreme west of Europe (excluding 
of course the arctic flora) are wholly deficient in 
America. These are among the considerations which suggest 
an ancient continuity of territory between America and Asia, 
under a latitude, or at any rate with a climate, more meridional 
than would be effected by a junction through the chains 
of the Aleutian and the Kurile Islands." 
I shall presently state why connection in a more meridional 
latitude need not be supposed. 
The deficiency in the temperate American flora of forms at 
all peculiar to western Europe is almost complete, and is most 
strikingly in contrast with the large number of eastern 
American forms repeated or represented in eastern Asia. Of 
genera divided between eastern North America and Europe, 
I can mention only Ostrya, Narthecium, Psamma, the maritime 
Cakile, and perhaps Scolopendrium. Hottonia might 
have been added, but for a species accredited to Java. And 
if we extend the range across our continent, we add only 
Cercis and Lceflingia. Of the ampler genera at all characteristic 
of the European flora, I can enumerate from the flora 
of the northern United States nothing more important than 
Helianthemum and Valerianella, two or three species of each 
(but those of the former hardly congeners of the European 
ones), adding that Hieracia and perhaps Cirsia are somewhat 
more plentiful in eastern than in western America. Let it 
also be noted, that there are even fewer western European 
types in the Pacific than in the Atlantic United States, notwithstanding 
the similarity of the climate ! 
That representation by allied species of genera peculiar or 
nearly peculiar to two regions furnishes evidence of similar 
nature and of equal pertinency with representation by identical 
species, will hardly be doubted. Whether or not susceptible 
of scientific explanation, it is certain that related species 
of phsenogamous plants are commonly associated in the same 
region, or are found in comparatively approximate (however 
large) areas of similar climate. 1 Remarkable exceptions may 
indeed be adduced, but the fact that they are remarkable goes 
to confirm the proposition. Indeed, the general expectation 
of botanists in this regard sufficiently indicates the common, 
implicit opinion. The discovery of a new Sarracenia or of 
a new Halesia in the Atlantic United States, or of a new 
Eschscholtzia, Platystemon, or Calais west of the Rocky 
Mountains, would excite no surprise. A converse discovery, 
or the detection of any of these genera in a remote region, 
would excite great surprise. The discovery of numerous 
closely related species thus divided between two widely separated 
districts might not, in the present state of our knowledge, 
suggest former continuity, migration, or interchange ; 
1 The fundamental and most difficult question remaining in natural 
history is here presented — the question whether this actual geographical 
association of congeneric or other nearly related species is primordial, 
and therefore beyond all scientific explanation, or whether even this may 
be to a certain extent a natural result. The only noteworthy attempt at 
a scientific solution of the problem, aiming to bring the variety as well as 
the geographical association of existing species more within the domain 
of cause and effect, is that of Mr. Darwin and (later) of Mr. Wallace, — 
partially sketched in their short papers " On the Tendency of Species 
to form Varieties, and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by 
natural Means of Selection," in the " Journal of the Proceedings of the 
Linnaian Society," vol. iii. (Zoology), p. 45. The views there suggested 
must bear a prominent part in future investigations into the distribution 
and probable origin of species. It will hardly be doubted that the tendencies 
and causes indicated are really operative ; the question is as to the 
extent of their operation. But lam already disposed, on these and other 
grounds, to admit that what are termed closely related species may in 
many cases be lineal descendants from a pristine stock, just as domesticated 
races are ; or, in other words, that the limits of occasional variation 
in species (if by them we mean primordial forms) are wider than is generally 
supposed, and that derivative forms when Segregated may be as constantly 
reproduced as their originals. 
but that of identical species peculiar to the two inevitably 
would. 
Why should it? Evidently because the natural supposition 
is that individuals of the same kind are descendants from 
a common stock, or have spread from a common centre ; and 
because the progress of investigation, instead of eliminating 
this preconception from the minds of botanists, has rather 
confirmed it. Every other hypothesis has derived its principal 
support from difficulties in the application of this. A 
review of what has been published upon the subject of late 
years makes it clear that the doctrine of the local origin of 
vegetable species has been more and more accepted, although, 
during the same period, species have been shown to be much 
more widely dispersed than was formerly supposed. Facts of 
the latter kind, and the conclusions to which they point, have 
been most largely and cogently brought out by Dr. Hooker, 
and are among the very important general results of his extensive 
investigations. And the best evidence of the preponderance 
of the theory of the local origin of species — notwithstanding 
the great increase of facts which at first would seem 
to tell the other way — is furnished by the works of the present 
De Candolle upon geographical botany. This careful and 
conscientious investigator formerly adopted and strenuously 
maintained Schouw's hypothesis of the double or multiple 
origin of species. But in his great work, the " Geographie 
Botanique Raisonnee," published in the year 1855, he has in 
effect discarded it, and this not from any theoretical objections 
to that view, but because he found it no longer needed 
to account for the general facts of distribution. This 
appears from his qualified though dubious adherence to the 
hypothesis of a double origin, as a dernier ressort, in the few 
and extraordinary cases which he could hardly explain in any 
other way. His decisive instance, indeed, is the occurrence 
of the eastern American Phryma leptostachya in the Himalaya 
Mountains. 
The facts presented in the present memoir effectually dispose 
of this subsidiary hypothesis, by showing that the supposed 
single exception belongs to a not uncommon case. 
Indeed, so many species are now known to be common to eastern 
and northern Asia and eastern North America, — some 
of them occurring also in northwestern America and some 
no t, — and so many genera are divided, between these two 
regions, that the antecedent improbability of such occurrence 
is done away, and more cases of the kind may be confidently 
expected. However others may regard them, it is clear that 
De Candolle would now explain these cases in accordance 
with the general views of distribution adopted by him, under 
which they naturally fall, — so abandoning the notion of a 
separate creation. 
I know not whether any botanist continues to maintain 
Schouw's hypothesis. But its elements have been developed 
into a different and more comprehensive doctrine, that of 
Agassiz, which should now be contemplated. It may be denominated 
the autochthonal hypothesis. 
In place of the ordinary conception, that each species originated 
in a local area, whence it has been diffused, according 
to circumstances, over more or less broad tracts, —in some 
cases becoming widely discontinuous in area through climatic 
or other physical changes operating during a long period of 
time, — Professor Agassiz maintains, substantially, that each 
species originated where it now occurs, probably in as great a 
number of individuals occupying as large an area, and generally 
the same area, or the same discontinuous areas as at the 
present time. 
This hypothesis is more difficult to test, because more 
ideal than any other. It might suffice for the present purpose 
to remark, that, in referring the actual distribution, no 
less than the origin, of existing species to the Divine will, it 
would remove the whole question out of the field of inductive 
science. Regarded as a philosophical question, Maupertius's 
well-known " principle of least action " might be legitimately 
urtred affainst it, namely, "that it is inconsistent with our 
idea of Divine wisdom that the Creator should use more 
power than was necessary to accomplish a given end." This 
philosophical principle holds so strictly true in all the mechanical 
adaptations of the universe, as Professor Pierce has 
shown, that we cannot think it inapplicable to the organic 
world also, and especially to the creation of beings endowed 
with such enormous multiplying power, and such means and 
facilities for dissemination, as most plants and animals. 
Why then should we suppose the Creator to do that supernaturally 
which would be naturally effected by the very instrumentalities 
which he has set in operation ? 
Viewed, however, simply in its scientific applications to the 
question under consideration (the distribution of plants in 
the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere), the autochthonal 
hypothesis might be tested by inquiring whether the 
primitive or earliest range of our species could possibly have 
remained unaffected by the serious and prolonged climatic 
vicissitudes to which they must needs have been subject; and 
whether these vicissitudes, and their natural consequences, 
may not suffice to explain the partial intermingling of the 
floras of North America and northern Asia, upon the siqaposition 
of the local origin of each species. Let us bring to the 
inquiry the considerations which Mr. Darwin first brought to 
bear upon such questions, and which have been systematically 
developed and applied by the late Edward Forbes, by Dr. 
Hooker, and by Alphonse De Candolle. 
No one now supposes that the existing species of plants are 
of recent creation, or that their present distribution is the result 
of a few thousand years. Various lines of evidence conspire 
to show that the time which has elapsed since the close 
of the tertiary period covers an immense number of years ; 
and that our existing flora may in part date from the tertiary 
period itself. It is now generally admitted that about twenty 
per cent, of the Mollusca of the middle tertiary (miocene 
epoch), and forty per cent, of the pliocene species on the Atlantic 
coast still exist ; and it is altogether probable that as 
large a portion of the vegetation may be of equal antiquity. 
From the nature of the case, the direct evidence as respects 
the flora could not be expected to be equally abundant. Still, 
although the fossil plants of the tertiary and the post-tertiary 
of North America have only now begun to be studied, the 
needful evidence is not wanting. 
On our northwestern coast, in the miocene of Vancouver's 
Island, among a singular mixture of species referable to Salix, 
Populus, Quercus, Planera, Diospyros, Salisburia, Ficus, 
Cinnamomum, Personia, or other Proteacece, and a Palm 
(the latter genera decisively indicating a tropical or subtropical 
climate), Mr. Lesquereux has identified one existing 
species, a tree characteristic of the same region ten or fifteen 
degrees farther south, namely, the Redwood or Sequoia senipervirens. 
In beds at Somerville referred to the lower or 
middle pliocene by Mr. Lesquereux, this botanist has recently 
identified the leaves of Persea Carolinensis, Primus C'aroliniana, 
and Quercus myrtifolia, now inhabiting the warm seacoast 
and islands of the southern States. 1 
The pliocene quadrupeds of Nebraska also show that the 
climate east of the Rocky Mountains at this epoch was much 
warmer than now. About the upper Missouri and Platte 
there were then several species of Camel (Procamelus) and 
allied Ruminantia and a Rhinoceros, besides a Mastodon, 
an Elephant, some Horses and their allies, not to mention a 
corresponding number of carnivorous animals. These herbivora 
probably fed in a good degree upon herbage and grasses 
of still existing species. For herbs and grasses are generally 
capable of enduring much greater climatic changes, and are 
therefore likely to be even more ancient, than trees. These 
animals must have had at least a warm-temperate climate to 
live in: so that in latitude 40°- 43° they could not have been 
anywhere near the northern limit of the temperate flora of 
those days ; indeed the temperate flora, which now in western 
Europe touches the Arctic Circle, must then have reached 
equally high latitudes in central or western North America. 
In other words, the temperate floras of America and Asia 
must then have been conterminous (with small oceanic separation), 
and therefore have commingled, as conterminous 
floras of similar climate everywhere do. 
At length, as the post-tertiary opened, the glacier epoch 
1 These and other data, obligingly communicated by Mr. Lesquereux, 
have been published in the May number of the " American Journal of 
Science and Arts," 3 ser., xvii. 
came slowly on, —an extraordinary refrigeration of the 
northern hemisphere, in the course of ages carrying glacial 
ice and arctic climate down nearly to the latitude of the Ohio. 
The change was evidently so gradual that it did not destroy 
the temperate flora, at least not those enumerated above as 
existing species. These and their fellows, or such as survive, 
must have been pushed on to lower latitudes as the cold advanced, 
just as they now would be if the temperature were to 
be again lowered ; and between them and the ice there was 
doubtless a band of subarctic and arctic vegetation, — portions 
of which, retreating up the mountains as the climate 
ameliorated and the ice receded, still scantily survive upon 
our highest Alleghanies, and more abundantly upon the colder 
summits of the mountains of New York and New England ; — 
demonstrating the existence of the present arctic-alpine vegetation 
during the glacial era ; and that the change of climate 
at its close was so gradual that it was not destructive to vegetable 
species. 
As the temperature rose, and the ice gradually retreated, the 
surviving temperate flora must have returned northward pari 
passu, and — which is an important point — must have advanced 
much farther northward, and especially northwestward, 
than it now does ; so far, indeed, that the temperate 
floras of North America and of eastern Asia, after having been 
for long ages most widely separated, must have become a second 
time conterminous. Whatever doubts may be entertained 
respecting the existence of our present vegetation generally 
before the glacial era, its existence immediately after that 
period will hardly be questioned. Here, therefore, may be 
adduced the direct evidence recently brought to light by Mr. 
Lesquereux, who has identified our Live Oak ( Quercus virens), 
Pecan CCarya olivapformis), Chinquapin (Castanea pumilaP), 
Planer-tree (SPlanera aquatica), Honey-Locust (Gleditschia 
triacanthos), Prinos coriaceus, and Acorus Calamus, — besides 
an Elm and a Ceanothus doubtfully referable to existing 
species, —on the Mississippi, near Columbus, Kentucky, in 
beds which Mr. Lesquereux regards as anterior to the drift. 
Professor D. D. Owen has indicated their position "as about 
one hundred and twenty feet lower than the ferrugineous sand 
in which the bones of the Megalonyx Jeffersonii were found." 
So that they belong to the period immediately succeeding the 
drift, if not to that immediately preceding it. All the vegetable 
remains of this deposit, which have been obtained in a 
determinable condition, have been referred, either positively 
or probably, to existing species of the United States flora, 
most of them now inhabiting the region a few degrees farther 
south. 
If, then, our present temperate flora existed at the close of 
the glacial epoch, the evidence that it soon attained a high 
northern range is ready to our hand. For then followed the 
second epoch of the post-tertiary, called the fluvial by Dana, 
when the region of the St. Lawrence and Lake Champlain was 
submerged, and the sea there stood five hundred feet above 
its present level ; when the higher temperate latitudes of 
North America, and probably the arctic generally, were less 
elevated than now, and the rivers vastly larger, as shown by 
the immense upper alluvial plains, from fifty to three hundred 
feet above their present beds ; and when the diminished 
breadth and lessened height of northern land must have given 
a much milder climate than the present. 
Whatever the cause, the milder climate of the fluvial epoch 
is undoubted. Its character, and therefore that of the vegetation, 
is decisively shown, as geologists have remarked, by 
the quadrupeds. While the Megatherium, Mylodon, Dicotyles, 
etc., demonstrate a warmer climate than at present in 
the southern and middle United States, the FPephas primigenius, 
ranging from Canada to the very shores of the Arctic 
Ocean, equally proves a temperate climate and a temperate 
flora in these northern regions. This is still more apparent 
in the species of the other continent, where, in Siberia, not 
only the Elephas primigenius, but also a Rhinoceros roamed 
northward to the arctic sea-coast. The quadrupeds that inhabited 
Europe in the same epoch are well known to indicate 
a warm temperate climate as far north as Britain, in the middle, 
if not the later post-tertiary. North America then had 
its herds of Mastodons, Elephants, Buffaloes or Bisons of dif- 
ferent species, Elks, Horses, Megalonyx, the Lion, etc. ; and, 
from the relations between this fauna and that of Europe, 
there is little doubt that the climate was as much milder 
than the present on this as on the other side of the ocean. 
All the facts known to us in the tertiary and post-terfciary, 
even to the limiting line of the drift, conspire to show that 
the difference between the two continents as to temperature 
was very nearly the same then as now, and that the isothermal 
lines of the northern hemisphere curved in the directions 
they now do. 
A climate such as these facts demonstrate for the fluvial 
epoch would again commingle the temperate floras of the 
two continents at Behring's Straits, and earlier -*- probably 
through more land than now — by way of the Aleutian and 
Kurile Islands. I cannot imagine a state of circumstances 
under which the Siberian Elephant could migrate, and temperate 
plants could not. 
The fluvial was succeeded by the " terrace epoch," as Dana 
names it, " a time of transition towards the present condition, 
bringing the northern part of the continent up to its present 
level and down to its present cool temperature," x o-ivinothe 
arctic flora its present range, and again separating the 
temperate floras of the New and of the Old World to the 
extent they are now separated. 
Under the light which these geological considerations throw 
upon the question, I cannot resist the conclusion, that the extant 
vegetable kingdom has a long and eventful history, and 
that the explanation of apparent anomalies in the geographical 
distribution of species may be found in the various and 
prolonged climatic or other physical vicissitudes to which they 
have been subject in earlier times ; that the occurrence of certain 
species, formerly supposed to be peculiar to North America, 
in a remote or antipodal region affords itself no presumption 
that they were originated there, and that the interchange 
of plants between eastern North America and eastern Asia is 
explicable upon the most natural and generally received hy- 
1 For the collocation and communication of the geological data here 
presented, I am indebted to the kindness of my friend, Professor Dana. 
pothesis (or at least offers no greater difficulty than does the 
arctic flora, the general homogeneousness of which round the 
world has always been thought compatible with local origin 
of the species), and is perhaps not more extensive than might 
be expected under the circumstances. That the interchange 
has mainly taken place in high northern latitudes, and that 
the isothermal lines have in earlier times turned northward 
on our eastern, and southward on our northwest coast, as they 
do now, are points which go far towards explaining why eastern 
North America, rather than Oregon and California, has 
been mainly concerned in this interchange, and why the temperate 
interchange, even with Europe, has principally taken 
place through Asia. 
Brasenia peltata. — To the remarks upon the known range 
of this species, I have now to add the interesting fact, that 
it exists upon the northwestern coast of America, having 
been gathered by Dr. Pickering, in Wilkes's South Sea Exploring 
Expedition, in a stream which falls into Gray's Harbor, 
lat. 47°. It must be local on the western side of the continent, 
or it would have been met with before. When this 
remarkable plant was known to occur only in eastern North 
America and eastern Australia, it made the strongest case in 
favor of double creation that perhaps has ever been adduced. 
But since it has been found to occur throughout the eastern 
Himalayas and in Japan, and has now been detected in northwestern 
America also, the case seems to crown the conclusions 
to which this memoir arrives. (Note to reprint in 
" American Journal of Science and Arts," 3 ser., xviii. 199.) 
SEQUOIA AND ITS HISTORY. 
The session being now happily inaugurated, your presiding 
officer of the last year has only one duty to perform before he 
surrenders his chair to his successor. If allowed to borrow a 
simile from the language of my own profession, I might liken 
the President of this Association to a biennial plant. He 
flourishes for the year in which he comes into existence, and 
performs his appropriate functions as presiding officer. 
When the second year comes round, he is expected to blossom 
out in an address and disappear. Each President, as he retires, 
is naturally expected to contribute something from his 
own investigations or his own line of study, usually to discuss 
some particular scientific topic. 
Now, although I have cultivated the field of North American 
botany, with some assiduity, for more than forty years, 
have reviewed our vegetable hosts, and assigned to no small 
number of them their names and their place in the ranks, yet, 
so far as our own wide country is concerned, I have been to a 
great extent a closet botanist. Until this summer I had not 
seen the Mississippi, nor set foot upon a prairie. 
To gratify a natural interest, and to gain some title for 
addressing a body of practical naturalists and explorers, I 
have made a pilgrimage across the continent. I have sought 
and viewed in their native haunts many a plant and flower 
which for me had long bloomed unseen, or only in the hortus 
siccus. I have been able to see for myself what species and 
what forms constitute the main features of the vegetation of 
each successive region, and record — as the vegetation unerringly 
does — the permanent characteristics of its climate. 
1 The address of the retiring President of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. Delivered at Dubuque, lowa, August, 
1872. (Proceedings American Association, xxi. 1.) 
Passing on from the eastern district, marked by its equably 
distributed rainfall, and therefore naturally forest-clad, I have 
seen the trees diminish in number, give place to wide prairies, 
restrict their growth to the borders of streams, and then disappear 
from the boundless drier plains ; have seen grassy 
plains change into a brown and sere desert, — desert in the 
common sense, but hardly anywhere botanically so ; have 
seen a fair growth of coniferous trees adorning the more 
favored slopes of a mountain range high enough to compel 
summer showers ; have traversed that broad and bare elevated 
region shut off on both sides by high mountains from the 
moisture supplied by either ocean, and longitudinally intersected 
by sierras which seemingly remain as naked as they 
were born ; and have reached at length the westward slopes 
of the high mountain barrier which, refreshed by the Pacific, 
bear the noble forests of the Sierra Nevada and the Coast 
Range, and among them trees which are the wonder of the 
world. As I stood in their shade, in the groves of Mariposa 
and Calaveras, and again under the canopy of the commoner 
Redwood, raised on columns of such majestic height and ample 
girth, it occurred to me that I could not do better than 
to share with you, upon this occasion, some of the thoughts 
which possessed my mind. In their development they may, 
perhaps, lead us up to questions of considerable scientific 
interest. 
I shall not detain you with any remarks — which would now 
be trite — upon the size or longevity of these far-famed Sequoia 
trees, or of the Sugar Pines, Incense-Cedar, and Firs 
associated with them, of which even the prodigious bulk of 
the dominating Sequoia does not sensibly diminish the grandeur. 
Although no account and no photographic representation 
of either species of the far-famed Sequoia trees gives any 
adequate impression of their singular majesty — still less of 
their beauty, — yet my interest in them did not culminate 
merely or mainly in considerations of their size and age. 
Other trees, jn other parts of the world, may claim to be older. 
Certain Australian Gum-trees (Eucalypti) are said to be 
taller. Some, we are told, rise so high that they might even 
cast a flicker of shadow upon the summit of the pyramid of 
Cheops. Yet the oldest of them doubtless grew from seed 
which was shed long after the names of the pyramid-builders 
had been forgotten. So far as we can judge from the actual 
counting of the layers of several trees, no Sequoia now alive 
can sensibly antedate the Christian era. 
Nor was I much impressed with an attraction of man's 
adding. That the more remarkable of these trees should bear 
distinguishing appellations seems proper enough; but the 
tablets of personal names which are affixed to many of them 
in the most visited groves — as if the memory of more or less 
notable people of our day might be made more enduring by 
the juxtaposition —do suggest some incongruity. When we 
consider that a hand's breadth at the circumference of any one 
of the venerable trunks so placarded has recorded in annual 
lines the lifetime of the individual thus associated with it, one 
may question whether the next hand's breadth may not measure 
the fame of some of the names thus ticketed for adventitious 
immortality. Whether it be the man or the tree that is 
honored in the connection, probably either would live as long, 
in fact and in memory, without it. 
One notable thing about these Sequoia trees is their isolation. 
Most of the trees associated with them are of peculiar 
species, and some of them are nearly as local. Yet every 
Pine, Fir, and Cypress in California is in some sort familiar, 
because it has near relatives in other parts of the world. But 
the Redwoods have none. The Redwood — including in that 
name the two species of "Big-trees " — belongs to the general 
Cypress family, but is sui generis. Thus isolated systematically, 
and extremely isolated geographically, and so wonderful 
in size and port, they more than other trees suggest questions. 
Were they created thus local and lonely, denizens of California 
only ; one in limited numbers in a few choice spots on 
the Sierra Nevada, the other along the Coast Range from the 
Bay of Monterey to the frontiers of Oregon ? Are they veritable 
Melchizedeks, without pedigree or early relationship, 
and possibly fated to be without descent ? 
Or are they now coming upon the stage —or rather were 
they coming but for man's interference —to play a part in 
the future ? 
Or are they remnants, sole and scanty survivors of a race 
that has played a grander part in the past, but is now verging 
to extinction ? Have they had a career, and can that career 
be ascertained or surmised, so that we may at least guess 
whence they came, and how, and when ? 
Time was, and not long ago, when such questions as these 
were regarded as useless and vain, — when students of natural 
history, unmindful of what the name denotes, were content 
with a knowledge of things as they now are, but gave little 
heed as to how they came to be so. Now, such questions are 
held to be legitimate, and perhaps not wholly unanswerable. 
It cannot now be said that these trees inhabit their present 
restricted areas simply because they are there placed in the 
climate and soil of all the world most congenial to them. 
These must indeed be congenial, or they would not survive. 
But when we see how Australian Eucalyptus trees thrive upon 
the Californian coast, and how these very Redwoods flourish 
upon another continent ; how the so-called Wild Oat (Avena 
sterilis of the Old World) has taken full possession of California 
; how that cattle and horses, introduced by the Spaniard, 
have spread as widely and made themselves as much at 
home on the plains of La Plata as on those of Tartary ; and 
that the Cardoon-thistle seeds, and others they brought with 
them, have multiplied there into numbers probably much exceeding 
those extant in their native lands ; indeed, when we 
contemplate our own race, and our own particular stock, taking 
such recent but dominating possession of this New World ; 
when we consider how the indigenous flora of islands generally 
succumbs to the foreigners which come in the train of man ; 
and that most weeds (i. e., the prepotent plants in open soil) 
of all temperate climates are not "to the manner born," but 
are self-invited intruders, — we must needs abandon the notion 
of any primordial and absolute adaptation of plants and animals 
to their habitats, which may stand in lieu of explanation, 
and so preclude our inquiring any further. The harmony of 
Nature and its admirable perfection need not be regarded as 
inflexible and changeless. Nor need Nature be likened to a 
statue, or a cast in rigid bronze, but rather to an organism, 
with play and adaptability of parts, and life and even soul 
informing the whole. Under the former view, Nature would 
be "the faultless monster which the world ne'er saw," but inscrutable 
as the Sphinx, whom it were vain, or worse, to question 
of the whence and whither. Under the other, the perfection 
of Nature, if relative, is multifarious and ever renewed ; 
and much that is enigmatical now may find explanation in 
some record of the past. 
That the two species of Redwood we are contemplating 
originated as they are and where they are, and for the part 
they are now playing, is, to say the least, not a scientific supposition, 
nor in any sense a probable one. Nor is it more 
likely that they are destined to play a conspicuous part in the 
future, or that they would have done so, even if the Indian's 
fires and the white man's axe had spared them. The Redwood 
of the coast (Sequoia sempervirens) had the stronger 
hold upon existence, forming as it did large forests throughout 
a narrow belt about three hundred miles in length, and 
being so tenacious of life that every large stump sprouts into 
a copse. But it does not pass the Bay of Monterey, nor cross 
the line of Oregon, although so grandly developed not far below 
it. The more remarkable Sequoia gigantea of the Sierra 
exists in numbers so limited that the separate groves may be 
reckoned upon the fingers, and the trees of most of them have 
been counted, except near their southern limit, where they are 
said to be more copious. A species limited in individuals 
holds its existence by a precarious tenure ; and this has a foothold 
only in a few sheltered spots, of a happy mean in temperature, 
and locally favored with moisture in summer. Even 
there, for some reason or other, the Pines with which they are 
associated (Pinus Lambertiana and P. ponderosa), the Firs 
(Abies grandis and A. magnifica), and even the Incense- 
Cedar (Libocedrus decurrens) possess a great advantage, 
and, though they strive in vain to emulate their size, wholly 
overpower the Sequoias in numbers. "To him that hath 
shall be given." The force of numbers eventually wins. At 
least in the commonly visited groves Sequoia gigantea is invested 
in its last stronghold, can neither advance into more 
exposed positions above, nor fall back into drier and barer 
ground below, nor hold its own in the long-run where it is, 
under present conditions ; and a little further drying of the 
climate, which must once have been much moister than now, 
would precipitate its doom. Whatever the individual longevity, 
certain if not speedy is the decline of a race in which 
a high death-rate afflicts the young. Seedlings of the big 
trees occur not rarely, indeed, but in meagre proportion to 
those of associated trees ; and small indeed is the chance that 
any of these will attain to " the days of the years of their 
fathers." " Few and evil " are the days of all the forest 
likely to be, while man, both barbarian and civilized, torments 
them with fires, fatal at once to seedlings, and at length to 
the aged also. The forests of California, proud as the State 
may be of them, are already too scanty and insufficient for 
her uses. Two lines, such as may be drawn with one sweep 
of a brush over the map, would cover them all. The coast 
Redwood — the most important tree in California, although a 
million times more numerous than its relative of the Sierra — 
is too good to live long. Such is its value for lumber and its 
accessibility, that, judging the future by the past, it is not 
likely, in its primeval growth, to outlast its rarer fellowspecies. 

Happily man preserves and disseminates as well as destroys. 
The species will doubtless be preserved to science, and for 
ornamental and other uses, in its own and other lands ; and 
the more remarkable individuals of the present day are likely 
to be sedulously cared for, all the more so as they become 
scarce. 
Our third question remains to be answered : Have these 
famous Sequoias played in former times and upon a larger 
stage a more imposing part, of which the present is but the 
epilogue ? We cannot gaze high up the huge and venerable 
trunks, which one crosses the continent to behold, without 
wishing that these patriarchs of the grove were able, like the 
long-lived antediluvians of Scripture, to hand down to us, 
through a few generations, the traditions of centuries, and so 
tell us something of the history of their race. Fifteen hundred 
annual layers have been counted, or satisfactorily made 
out, upon one or two fallen trunks. It is probable that close 
to the heart of some of the living trees may be found the 
circle that records the year of our Saviour's nativity. A few 
generations of such trees might carry the history a long way 
back. But the ground they stand upon, and the marks of 
very recent geological change and vicissitude in the region 
around, testify that not very many such generations can have 
flourished just there, at least in an unbroken series. When 
their site was covered by glaciers, these Sequoias must have 
occupied other stations, if, as there is reason to believe, they 
then existed in the land. 
I have said that the Redwoods have no near relatives in 
the country of their abode, and none of their genus anywhere 
else. Perhaps something may be learned of their genealogy 
by inquiring of such relatives as they have. There are only 
two of any particular nearness of kin ; and they are far away. 
One is the Bald Cypress, our southern Cypress (Taxodium), 
inhabiting the swamps of the Atlantic coast from Maryland 
to Texas, thence extending — with, probably, a specific difference 
— into Mexico. It is well known as one of the largest 
trees of our Atlantic forest-district, and although it never — 
except perhaps in Mexico, and in rare instances — attains the 
portliness of its western relatives, yet it may equal them in 
longevity. The other relative is Glyptostrobus, a sort of modified 
Taxodium, being about as much like our Bald Cypress as 
one species of Redwood is like the other. 
Now species of the same type, especially when few, and the 
type peculiar, are, in a general way, associated geographically, 
i. e., inhabit the same country, or (in a large sense) the same 
region. Where it is not so, where near relatives are separated, 
there is usually something to be explained. Here is an 
instance. These four trees, sole representatives of their tribe, 
dwell almost in three separate quarters of the world : the two 
Redwoods in California, the Bald Cypress in Atlantic North 
America, its near relative, Glyptostrobus, in China. 
It was not always so. In the tertiary period, the geological 
botanists assure us, our own very Taxodium or Bald 
Cypress, and a Glyptostrobus, exceedingly like the present 
Chinese tree, and more than one Sequoia, coexisted in a 
fourth quarter of the globe, namely, in Europe ! This brings 
up the question : Is it possible to bridge over these four wide 
intervals of space and the much vaster interval of time, so 
as to brino- these extraordinarily separated relatives into connection 
? The evidence which may be brought to bear upon 
this question is various and widely scattered. I bespeak your 
patience while I endeavor to bring together, in an abstract, 
the most important points of it. 
Some interesting facts may come out by comparing generally 
the botany of the three remote regions, each of which is 
the sole home of one of these genera, *. e., Sequoia in California, 
Taxodium in the Atlantic United States, 1 and Glyptostrobus 
in China, which compose the whole of the peculiar 
tribe under consideration. 
Note then, first, that there is another set of three or four 
peculiar trees, in this case of the Yew family, which has just 
the same peculiar distribution, and which therefore may have 
the same explanation, whatever that explanation be. The 
genus Torreya, which commemorates our botanical Nestor 
and a former president of this association, Dr. Torrey, was 
founded upon a tree rather lately discovered (that is, about 
thirty-five years ago) in northern Florida. It is a noble, 
Yew-like tree, and very local, being, so far as known, nearly 
confined to a few miles along the shores of a single river. It 
seems as if it had somehow been crowded down out of the 
Alleghanies into its present limited southern quarters ; for 
in cultivation it evinces a northern hardiness. Now another 
species of Torreya is a characteristic tree of Japan ; and one 
very like it, if not the same, inhabits the mountains of north- 
1 The phrase " Atlantic United States " is here used throughout in 
contradistinction to Pacific United States. To the former of course belongs, 
botanically and geographically, the valley of the Mississippi and its 
tributaries up to the eastern border of the great woodless plains, which 
constitute an intermediate region. 
ern China, — belongs, therefore, to the eastern Asiatic temperate 
region, of which northern China is a part, and Japan, 
as we shall see, the portion most interesting to us. There is 
only one more species of Torreya, and that is a companion of 
the Redwoods in California. It is the tree locally known 
under the name of the California Nutmeg. Here are three 
or four near brethren, species of the same genus, known nowhere 
else than in these three habitats. 
Moreover, the Torreya of Florida is associated with a Yew ; 
and the trees of this grove are the only Yew-trees of eastern 
North America ; for the Yew of our northern woods is a decumbent 
shrub. A Yew-tree, perhaps the same, is found with 
Taxodium in the temperate parts of Mexico. The only other 
Yews in America grow with the Redwoods and the other 
Torreya in California, and extend northward into Oregon. 
Yews are also associated with Torreya in Japan ; and they 
extend westward through Mandchuria and the Himalayas to 
western Europe, and even to the Azores Islands, where occurs 
the common Yew of the Old World. 
So we have three groups of coniferous trees which agree in 
this peculiar geographical distribution, with, however, a notable 
extension of range in the case of the Yew : first, the Redwoods, 
and their relatives, Taxodium and Glyptostrobus, which 
differ so as to constitute a genus for each of the three regions ; 
second, the Torreyas, more nearly akin, merely a different 
species in each region ; third, the Yews, still more closely related 
while more widely disseminated, of which it is yet uncertain 
whether they constitute seven, five, three, or only one 
species. Opinions differ, and can hardly be brought to any 
decisive test. However it be determined, it may still be said 
that the extreme differences among the Yews do not surpass 
those of the recognized variations of the European Yew, the 
cultivated races included. 
It appears to me that these several instances all raise the 
very same question, only with different degrees of emphasis, 
and, if to be explained at all, will have the same kind of explanation. 

Continuing the comparison between the three regions with 
which we are concerned, we note that each has its own species 
of Pines, Firs, Larches, etc., and of a few deciduous-leaved 
trees such as Oaks and Maples ; all of which have no peculiar 
significance for the present purpose, because they are of 
genera which are common all round the northern hemisphere. 
Leaving these out of view, the noticeable point is that the 
vegetation of California is most strikingly unlike that of the 
Atlantic United States. They possess some plants, and some 
peculiarly American plants in common, — enough to show, as 
I imagine, that the difficulty was not in the getting from the 
one district to the other, or into both from a common source, 
but in abiding there. The primordially unbroken forest of 
Atlantic North America, nourished by rainfall distributed 
throughout the year, is widely separated from the western region 
of sparse and discontinuous tree-belts of the same latitude 
on the western side of the continent, where summer rain is 
wanting, or nearly so, by immense treeless plains and plateaux 
of more or less aridity, traversed by longitudinal mountain 
ranges of similar character. Their nearest approach is at the 
north, in the latitude of Lake Superior, where, on a more 
rainy line, trees of the Atlantic forest and that of Oregon 
may be said to interchange. The change of species and 
of the aspect of vegetation in crossing, say on the fortyseventh 
parallel, is slight in comparison with that on the 
thirty-seventh or near it. Confiding our attention to the lower 
latitude, and under the exceptions already specially noted, 
we may say that almost every characteristic form in the vegetation 
of the Atlantic States is wanting in California, and 
the characteristic plants and trees of California are wanting 
here. 
California has no Magnolia nor Tulip trees, nor Star-anisetree 
; no so-called Papaw (Asimina) ; no Barberry of the 
common single-leaved sort ; no Podophyllum or other of the 
peculiar associated genera ; no Nelumbo nor White Waterlily 
; no Prickly Ash nor Sumach ; no Loblolly-bay nor 
Stuartia ; no Basswood nor Linden-trees ; neither Locust, 
Honey-locust, Coffee-trees (Gymnocladus), nor Yellow-wood 
(Cladrastis) ; nothing answering to Hydrangea or Witch- 
hazel, to Gum-trees (Nyssa and Liquidambar), Viburnum or 
Diervilla ; it has few Asters and Golden-rods ; no Lobelias ; 
no Huckleberries and hardly any Blueberries ; no Epigaaa, 
the charm of our earliest eastern spring, tempering an icy April 
wind with a delicious wild fragrance ; no Kalmia nor Clethra, 
nor Holly, nor Persimmon; no Catalpa-tree, nor Trumpetcreeper 
(Tecoma) ; nothing answering to Sassafras, nor to 
Benzoin-tree, nor to Hickory ; neither Mulberry nor Elm ; no 
Beech, true Chestnut, Hornbeam, nor Ironwood, nor a proper 
Birch-tree ; and the enumeration might be continued very 
much further by naming herbaceous plants and others familiar 
only to botanists. 
In their place California is filled with plants of other types, 
— trees, shrubs, and herbs, of which I will only remark that 
they are, with one or two exceptions, as different from the 
plants of the eastern Asiatic region with which we are concerned 
(Japan, China, and Mandchuria), as they are from 
those of Atlantic North America. Their near relatives, when 
they have any in other lands, are mostly southward, on the 
Mexican plateau, or many as far south as Chili. The same 
may be said of the plants of the intervening great plains, except 
that northward and in the subsaline vegetation there are 
some close alliances with the flora of the steppes of Siberia. 
And along the crests of high mountain ranges the arctic-alpine 
flora has sent southward more or less numerous representatives 
through the whole length of the country. 
If we now compare, as to their flora generally, the Atlantic 
United States with Japan, Mandchuria, and northern China, 
—i. e., eastern North America with eastern north Asia, half 
the earth's circumference apart, —we find an astonishingsimilarity. 
The larger part of the genera of our own region, 
which I have enumerated as wanting in California, are present 
in Japan or Mandchuria, along with many other peculiar 
plants, divided between the two. There are plants enough of 
the one region which have no representatives in the other. 
There are types which appear to have reached the Atlantic 
States from the south ; and there is a larger infusion of subtropical 
Asiatic types into temperate China and Japan ; 
among these there is no relationship between the two countries 
to speak of. There are also, as I have already said, no 
small number of genera and some species which, being common 
all round or partly round the northern temperate zone, 
have no special significance because of their occurrence in 
these two antipodal floras, although they have testimony to 
bear upon the general question of geographical distribution. 
The point to be remarked is, that many, or even most, of the 
genera and species which are peculiar to North America as 
compared with Europe, and largely peculiar to Atlantic North 
America as compared with the Californian region, are also 
represented in Japan and Mandchuria, either by identical or 
by closely similar forms. The same rule holds on a more 
northward line, although not so strikingly. If we compare 
the plants, say of New England and Pennsylvania (lat. 45°-47°), 
with those of Oregon, and then with those of northeastern 
Asia, we shall find many of our own curiously repeated 
in the latter, while only a small number of them can be 
traced along the route even so far as the western slope, of the 
Rocky Mountains. And these repetitions of east American 
types in Japan and neighboring districts are in all degrees 
of likeness. Sometimes the one is undistinguishable from 
the other ; sometimes there is a difference of aspect, but 
hardly of tangible character ; sometimes the two would be 
termed marked varieties if they grew naturally in the same 
forest or in the same region ; sometimes they are what the 
botanist calls representative species, the one answering closely 
to the other, but with some differences regarded as specific ; 
sometimes the two are merely of the same genus, or not quite 
that, but of a single or very few species in each country ; 
when the point which interests us is, that this peculiar limited 
type should occur in two antipodal places, and nowhere 
else. 
It would be tedious, and, except to botanists, abstruse, to 
enumerate instances ; yet the whole strength of the case depends 
upon the number of such instances. I propose therefore, 
if the Association does me the honor to print this discourse, 
to append in a note a list of the more remarkable 
ones. 1 But I would here mention certain cases as specimens. 

Our Rhus Toxicodendron, or Poison Ivy, is very exactly 
repeated in Japan, but is found in no other part of the world, 
although a species much like it abounds in California. Our 
other poisonous Rhus (R. venenata), commonly called Poison 
Dogwood, is in no way represented in western America, but 
has so close an analogue in Japan that the two were taken 
for the same by Thunberg and Linnaeus, who called them both 
SR. Vernix. 
Our northern Fox-grape, Vitis Labrusca, is wholly confined 
to the Atlantic States, except that it reappears in Japan 
and that region. 
The original Wistaria is a woody leguminous climber with 
showy blossoms, native to the middle Atlantic States ; the 
other species, which we so much prize in cultivation, W. 
Sinensis, is from China, as its name denotes, or perhaps only 
from Japan, where it is certainly indigenous. 
Our Yellow-wood (Cladrastis) inhabits a very limited district 
on the western slope of the Alleghanies. Its only and 
very near relative, Maackia, is in Mandchuria. 
The Hydrangeas have some species in our Alleghany region 
; all the rest belong to the Chino-Japanese region and 
its continuation westward. The same may be said of Philadelphus, 
except that there are one or two mostly very similar 
species in California and Oregon. 
Our Blue Cohosh (Caulophyllum) is confined to the woods 
of the Atlantic States, but has lately been discovered in 
Japan. 2 A peculiar relative of it, Diphylleia, confined to the 
higher Alleghanies, is also repeated in Japan, with a slight 
difference, so that it may barely be distinguished as another 
species. Another relative is our Twin-leaf (Jeffersonia) of 
the Alleghany region alone ; a second species has lately turned 
up in Mandchuria. A relative of this is Podophyllum, our 
Mandrake, a common inhabitant of the Atlantic United 
States, but found nowhere else. There is one other species 
of it, and that is in the Himalayas. Here are four most 
1 See Appendix, I. 2 Appendix, 11. 
peculiar genera of one family, each of a single species in the 
Atlantic United States, which are duplicated on the other 
side of the world, either in identical species, or in an analogous 
species, while nothing else of the kind is known in any 
other part of the world. 
I ought not to omit Ginseng, the root so prized by the 
Chinese, which they obtained from their northern provinces 
and Mandchuria, and which is now known to inhabit Corea 
and northern Japan. The Jesuit Fathers identified the plant 
in Canada and the Atlantic States, brought over the Chinese 
name by which we know it, and established the trade in it, 
which was for many years most profitable. The exportation 
of Ginseng to China probably has not yet entirely ceased. 
Whether the Asiatic and the Atlantic American Ginsengs 
are to be regarded as of the same species or not is somewhat 
uncertain, but they are hardly, if at all, distinguishable. 
There is a shrub, Elliottia, which is so rare and local that 
it is known only at two stations on the Savannah River, in 
Georgia. It is of peculiar structure, and was without near 
relative until one was lately discovered in Japan (Tripetaleia), 
so like it as hardly to be distinguishable except by having 
the parts of the blossom in threes instead of fours, — a 
difference which is not uncommon in the same genus, or even 
in the same species. 
Suppose Elliottia had happened to be collected only once, 
a good while ago, and all knowledge of the limited and obscure 
locality were lost ; and meanwhile the Japanese form came to 
be known. Such a case would be parallel with an actual one. 
A specimen of a peculiar plant (Shortia galacifolia) was 
detected in the herbarium of the elder Michaux, wdio collected 
it (as his autograph ticket shows) somewhere in the high 
Alleghany Mountains, more than eighty years ago. No one 
has seen the living plant since or knows where to find it, if 
haply it still flourishes in some secluded spot. At length it 
is found in Japan ; and I had the satisfaction of making the 
identification. 1 One other relative is also known in Japan ; 
and another, still unpublished, has just been detected in 
Thibet. 
1 " Amer. Jour. Science," 1867, p. 402 ; "Proc. Amer. Acad.," viii. p. 244. 
Whether the Japanese and the Alleghanian plants are 
exactly the same or not, it needs complete specimens of the 
two to settle. So far as we know, they are just alike ; and 
even if some difference were discerned between them, it would 
not appreciably alter the question as to how such a result 
came to pass. Each and every one of the analogous cases I 
have been detailing — and very many more could be mentioned 
■ — raises the same question, and would be satisfied 
with the same answer. 
These singular relations attracted my curiosity early in the 
course of my botanical studies, when comparatively few of 
them were known, and my serious attention in later years, 
when I had numerous and new Japanese plants to study in 
the collections made by Messrs. Williams and Morrow, during 
Commodore Perry's visit in 1853, and especially by Mr. 
Charles Wright, in Commodore Rodgers's expedition in 1855. 
I then discussed this subject somewhat fully, and tabulated 
the facts within my reach. 1 
This was before Heer had developed the rich fossil botany 
of the arctic zone, before the immense antiquity of existing 
species of plants was recognized, and before the publication 
of Darwin's now famous volume on the " Origin of Species " 
had introduced and familiarized the scientific world with those 
now current ideas respecting the history and vicissitudes of 
species with which I attempted to deal in a moderate and 
feeble way. 
My speculation was based upon the former glaciation of the 
northern temperate zone, and the inference of a warmer period 
preceding and perhaps following. I considered that our own 
present vegetation, or its proximate ancestry, must have occupied 
the arctic and subarctic regions in pliocene times, and 
that it had been gradually pushed southward as the temperature 
lowered and the glaciation advanced, even beyond its 
present habitation ; that plants of the same stock and kindred, 
probably ranging round the arctic zone as the present arctic 
species do, made their forced migration southward upon widely 
different longitudes, and receded more or less as the climate 
1 "Mem. Amer. Acad.," vol. vi. pp. 377-458 (1859). 
grew warmer ; that the general difference of climate which 
marks the eastern and the western sides of the continents — 
the one extreme, the other mean — was doubtless even then 
established, so that the same species and the same sorts of 
species would be likely to secure and retain foothold in the 
similar climates of Japan and the Atlantic United States, but 
not in intermediate regions of different distribution of heat 
and moisture ; so that different species of the same genus, as 
in Torreya, or different genera of the same group, as Redwood, 
Taxodium, and Glyptostrobus, or different associations 
of forest trees, might establish themselves each in the region 
best suited to their particular requirements, while they w r ould 
fail to do so in any other. These views implied that the 
sources of our actual vegetation and the explanation of these 
peculiarities were to be sought in, and presupposed, an ancestry 
in pliocene or still earlier times, occupying the higher 
northern regions. And it was thought that the occurrence of 
peculiarly North American genera in Europe in the tertiary 
period (such as Taxodium, Carya, Liquidambar, Sassafras, 
Negundo, etc.), might be best explained on the assumption of 
earlv interchange and diffusion through north Asia, rather 
than by that of the fabled Atlantis. 
The hypothesis supposed a gradual modification of species 
in different directions under altering conditions, at least to 
the extent of producing varieties, sub-species, and representative 
species, as they may be variously regarded ; likewise the 
single and local origination of each type, which is now almost 
universally taken for granted. 
The remarkable facts in regard to the eastern American 
and Asiatic floras which these speculations were to explain 
have since increased in number, more especially through the 
admirable collections of Dr. Maximo wicz in Japan and adjacent 
countries, and the critical comparisons he has made and 
is still engaged upon. 
I am bound to state that, in a recent general work 1 by 
a distinguished European botanist, Professor Grisebach, of 
1 " Die Vegetation der Erde nach ihrer klimatischen Anordnung." 
1871. 
Gottingen, these facts have been emptied of all special significance, 
and the relations between the Japanese and the 
Atlantic United States flora declared to be no more intimate 
than might be expected from the situation, climate, and present 
opportunity of interchange. This extraordinary conclusion 
is reached by regarding as distinct species all the plants 
common to both countries between which any differences have 
been discerned, although such differences would probably 
count for little if the two inhabited the same country, thus 
transferring many of my list of identical to that of representative 
species ; and then by simply eliminating from consideration 
the whole array of representative species, i. e., all cases 
in which the Japanese and the American plant are not exactly 
alike. As if, by pronouncing the cabalistic word species, 
the question were settled, or rather the greater part of it remanded 
out of the domain of science ; as if, while complete 
identity of forms implied community of origin, any thingshort 
of it carried no presumption of the kind ; so leaving ail 
these singular duplicates to be wondered at, indeed, but wholly 
beyond the reach of inquiry. 1 
Now the only known cause of such likeness is inheritance ; 
and as all transmission of likeness is with some difference in 
individuals, and as changed conditions have resulted as is 
well known, in very considerable differences, it seems to me 
that, if the high antiquity of our actual vegetation could be 
rendered probable, not to say certain, and the former habitation 
of any of our species or of very near relatives of them in 
high northern regions could be ascertained, my whole case 
would be made out. The needful facts, of which I was ignorant 
when my essay was published, have now been for some 
years made known, — thanks, mainly, to the researches of 
Heer upon ample collections of arctic fossil plants. These 
are confirmed and extended by new investigations, by Heer 
and Lesquereux, the results of which have been indicated to 
me by the latter. 2 
1 See Appendix, 11. 
2 Reference should also be made to the extensive researches of Newberry 
upon the tertiary and cretaceous floras of the western United 
The Taxodium, which everywhere abounds in the miocene 
formations in Europe, has been specifically identified, first by 
Goeppert, then by Heer, with our common Cypress of the 
southern States. It has been found fossil in Spitsbergen, 
Greenland, and Alaska, — in the latter country along with the 
remains of another form, distinguishable, but very like the 
common species ; and this has been identified by Lesquereux 
in the miocene of the Rocky Mountains. So there is one 
species of tree which has come down essentially unchanged 
from the tertiary period, which for a long while inhabited 
both Europe and North America, and also, at some part of 
the period, the region which geographically connects the two 
(once doubtless much more closely than now), but which has 
survived only in the Atlantic United States and Mexico. 
The same Sequoia which abounds in the same miocene formations 
in northern Europe has been abundantly found in 
those of Iceland, Spitzbergen, Greenland, Mackenzie River, 
and Alaska. It is named S. liongsdorfli, but is pronounced 
to be very much like S. sempervirens, our living Redwood of 
the Californian coast, and to be the ancient representative 
of it. Fossil specimens of a similar, if not the same, species 
have recently been detected in the Rocky Mountains by Hayden, 
and determined by our eminent palseontological botanist 
Lesquereux ; and he assures me that he has the common 
Redwood itself from Oregon in a deposit of tertiary age. 
Another Sequoia (S. Sternbergii), discovered in miocene deposits 
in Greenland, is pronounced to be the representative of 
S. gigantca, the Big Tree of the Californian Sierra. If the 
States. See especially Professor Newberry's Paper in the " Boston Journal 
of Natural History," vol. vii. No. 4, describing fossil plants of Vancouver's 
Island, etc. ; his " Notes on the Later Extinct Floras of North 
America," etc., in "Annals of the Lyceum of Natural History," vol. ix., 
April, 1868 ; " Report on the Cretaceous and Tertiary Plants collected in 
Raynolds and Hayden's Yellowstone and Missouri Exploring Expedition, 
1859-1860," published in 1869 ; and an interesting article entitled " The 
Ancient Lakes of Western America, their Deposits and Drainage," published 
in " The American Naturalist," January, 1871. 
The only document I was able to consult was Lesquereux's Report on 
the Fossil Plants, in Hayden's Report of 1872. 
Taxodium of the tertiary time in Europe and throughout the 
arctic regions is the ancestor of our present Bald Cypress, — 
which is assumed in regarding them as specifically identical, 
— then I think we may, with our present light, fairly assume 
that the two Redwoods of California are the direct or collateral 
descendants of the two ancient species which so closely 
resemble them. 
The forests of the arctic zone in tertiary times contained at 
least three other species of Sequoia, as determined by their 
remains, one of which, from Spitsbergen, also much resembles 
the common Redwood of California. Another, " which appears 
to have been the commonest coniferous tree on Disco," 
was common in England and some other parts of Europe. So 
the Sequoias, now remarkable for their restricted station and 
numbers, as well as for their extraordinary size, are of an 
ancient stock : their ancestors and kindred formed a large 
part of the forests, which flourished throughout the polar regions, 
now desolate and iee-clad, and which extended into low 
latitudes in Europe. On this continent one species, at least, 
had reached to the vicinity of its present habitat before the 
glaciation of the region. Among the fossil specimens already 
found in California, but which our trustworthy palaaontological 
botanist has not yet had time to examine, we may expect 
to find evidence of the early arrival of these two Redwoods 
upon the ground which they now, after much vicissitude, 
scantily occupy. 
Differences of climate, or circumstances of migration, or 
both, must have determined the survival of Sequoia upon the 
Pacific, and of Taxodium upon the Atlantic coast. And still 
the Redwoods will not stand in the east, nor could our Taxodium 
find a congenial station in California. Both have probably 
had their opportunity in the olden time, and failed. 
As to the remaining near relative of Sequoia, the Chinese 
Glyptostrobus, a species of it, and its veritable representative, 
was contemporaneous with Sequoia and Taxodium, not only 
in temperate Europe, but throughout the arctic regions from 
Greenland to Alaska. According to Newberry, it was abundantly 
represented in the miocene flora of the temperate zone 
of our own continent, from Nebraska to the Pacific. 
Very similar would seem to have been the fate of a more 
familiar gymnospermous tree, the Gingko or Salisburia. It 
is now indigenous to Japan only. Its ancestor, as we may 
fairly call it, — since, according to Heer, " it corresponds so 
entirely with the living species that it can scarcely be separated 
from it," — once inhabited northern Europe and the 
whole arctic region round to Alaska, and had even a representative 
farther south, in our Rocky Mountain district. For 
some reason, this and Glyptostrobus survive only on the 
shores of eastern Asia. 
Libocedrus, on the other hand, appears to have cast in its 
lot with the Sequoias. Two species, according to Heer, were 
with them in Spitzbergen. L. decurrens, the Incense Cedar, 
is one of the noblest associates of the present Redwoods. 
But all the rest are in the southern hemisphere, two at the 
southern extremity of the Andes, two in the South Sea Islands. 
It is only by bold and far-reaching suppositions that 
they can be geographically associated. 
The genealogy of the Torreyas is still wholly obscure ; yet 
it is not unlikely that the Yew-like trees, named Taxites, which 
flourished with the Sequoias in the tertiary arctic forests, are 
the remote ancestors of the three species of Torreya, now 
severally in Florida, in California, and in Japan. 
As to the Pines and Firs, these were more numerously associated 
with the ancient Sequoias of the polar forests than 
with their present representatives, but in different species, 
apparently more like those of eastern than of western North 
America. They must have encircled the polar zone then, as 
they encircle the present temperate zone now. 
I must refrain from all enumeration of the angiospermous 
or ordinary deciduous trees and shrubs, which are now 
known, by their fossil remains, to have flourished throughout 
the polar regions when Greenland better deserved its name 
and enjoyed the present climate of New England and New 
Jersey. Then Greenland and the rest of the north abounded 
with Oaks, representing the several groups of species which 
now inhabit both our eastern and western forest districts ; 
several Poplars, one very like our Balsam Poplar, or Balm of 
Gilead-tree ; more Beeches than there are now, a Hornbeam, 
and a Hop-Plornbeam, some Birches, a Persimmon, and a 
Planer-tree, near representatives of those of the Old World, 
at least of Asia, as well as of Atlantic North America, but 
all wanting in California ; one Juglans like the Walnut of 
the Old World, and another like our Black Walnut ; two or 
three Grapevines, one near our southern Fox Grape or Muscadine, 
another near our northern Frost Grape ; a Tilia, very 
like our Basswood of the Atlantic States only : a Liquidambar 
; a Magnolia, which recalls our M. grandiflora ; a Liriodendron, 
sole representative of our Tulip-tree ; and a Sassafras, 
very like the living tree. 
Most of these, it will be noticed, have their nearest or their 
only living representatives in the Atlantic States, and when 
elsewhere, mainly in eastern Asia. Several of them, or of 
species like them, have been detected in our tertiary deposits, 
west of the Mississippi, by Newberry and Lesquereux. Herbaceous 
plants, as it happens, are rarely preserved in a fossil 
state, else they would probably supply additional testimony 
to the antiquity of our existing vegetation, its wide diffusion 
over the northern and now frigid zone, and its enforced migration 
under changes of climate. 1 
Concluding, then, as we must, that our existing vegetation 
is a continuation of that of the tertiary period, may we suppose 
that it absolutely originated then ? Evidently not. The 
preceding cretaceous period has furnished to Carruthers in 
Europe a fossil fruit like that of the Sequoia gigantea of the 
famous groves, associated with Pines of the same character as 
those that accompany the present tree ; has furnished to Heer, 
1 There is at least one instance so opportune to the present argument 
that it should not pass unnoticed, although I had overlooked the record 
until now. Onoclea sensibilis is a Fern peculiar to the Atlantic United 
States (where it is common and widespread) and to Japan. Professor 
Newberry identified it several years ago in a collection obtained by Dr. 
Hayden of miocene fossil plants of Dacota Territory, which is far beyond 
its present habitat. He moreover regards it as probably identical 
with a fossil specimen " described by the late Professor E. Forbes, under 
the name of Filicites Hebridicus, and obtained by the Duke of Argyll from 
the Island of Mull." 
from Greenland, two more Sequoias, one of them identical 
with a tertiary species, and one nearly allied to Sequoia 
Langsdorfii, which in turn is a probable ancestor of the 
common Californian Redwood ; has furnished to Newberry 
and Lesquereux in North America the remains of another 
ancient Sequoia, a Glyptostrobus, a Liquidambar which well 
represents our Sweet Gum, Oaks analogous to living ones, 
leaves of a Plane-tree, which are also in the tertiary and are 
scarcely distinguishable from our own Platanus occidentalis, 
of a Magnolia and a Tulip-tree, and "of a Sassafras undistinguishable 
from our living species." I need not continue 
the enumeration. Suffice it to say that the facts justify the 
conclusion which Lesquereux — a scrupulous investigator — 
has already announced : " that the essential types of our 
actual flora are marked in the cretaceous period, and have 
come to us after passing, without notable changes, through 
the tertiary formations of our continent." 
According to these views, as regards plants at least, the 
adaptation to successive times and changed conditions has 
been maintained, not by absolute renewals, but by gradual 
modifications. I, for one, cannot doubt that the present existing 
species are the lineal successors of those that garnished 
the earth in the old time before them, and that they were as 
well adapted to their surroundings then, as those which flourish 
and bloom around us are to their conditions now. Order 
and exquisite adaptation did not wait for man's coming, nor 
were they ever stereotyped. Organic nature, —by which I 
mean the system and totality of living things, and their adaptation 
to each other and to the world, — with all its apparent 
and indeed real stability, should be likened, not to the ocean, 
which varies only by tidal oscillations from a fixed level to 
which it is always returning, but rather to a river, so vast 
that we can neither discern its shores nor reach its sources, 
whose onward flow is not less actual because too slow to be 
observed by the ephemerae which hover over its surface, or 
are borne upon its bosom. 
Such ideas as these, though still repugnant to some, and 
not long since to many, have so possessed the minds of the 
naturalists of the present day, that hardly a discourse can be 
pronounced or an investigation prosecuted without reference 
to them. I suppose that the views here taken are little, if at 
all, in advance of the average scientific mind of the day. I 
cannot regard them as less noble than those which they are 
succeeding. 
An able philosophical writer, Miss Frances Power Cobbe, 
has recently and truthfully said : 1 
" It is a singular fact, that when we can find out how anything 
is done, our first conclusion seems to be that God did 
not do it. No matter how wonderful, how beautiful, how intimately 
complex and delicate has been the machinery which 
has worked, perhaps for centuries, perhaps for millions of 
ages, to bring about some beneficent result, if we can but 
catch a glimpse of the wheels its divine character disappears." 
I agree with the writer that this first conclusion is premature 
and unworthy, — I will add, deplorable. Through what 
faults or infirmities of dogmatism on the one hand, and skepticism 
on the other, it came to be so thought, we need not 
here consider. Let us hope, and I confidently expect, that it 
is not to last ; that the religious faith which survived without 
a shock the notion of the fixity of the earth itself may equally 
outlast the notion of the absolute fixity of the species which 
inhabit it ; that in the future even more than in the past, 
faith in an order, which is the basis of science, will not —as 
it cannot reasonably —be dissevered from faith in an Ordainer, 
which is the basis of religion. 
APPENDIX. 
I. 
In the following table the names in the left-hand column are from 
my " Manual of the Botany of the Northern United States," and 
from Dr. Chapman's "Flora of the Southern United States," the 
two together comprehending the flora of the Atlantic, United States 
east of the Mississippi River. Alpine plants on the one hand, and 
subtropical plants on the other, are excluded. 
1 "Darwinism in Morals," in "Theological Review," April, 1871. 
The entries in the middle column, when there are any, are of 
identical or representative species occurring in Oregon or California. 
Those in the right-hand column are of such species in Japan, or 
other parts of northeastern Asia, including the Himalayas and Siberia 
as far west as the Altai Mountains. 
When these are not identical, or so closely related to the American 
species that the one may be said strictly to represent the other, 
also when genera or parts of genera are adduced merely as representing 
the same type in these respective regions, the names are included 
in parentheses. 
Species which extend through Europe into northeastern Asia, 
and therefore nearly round the temperate zone, are also left out of 
view, the object being to consider the peculiar relations of the floras 
of eastern North America and eastern temperate Asia. The table 
has been drawn up off-hand, from the means within reach. Probably 
the example might be considerably increased. 
ExTRA-EuROrEAN (TEMPERATE) GENERA AND SPECIES OF THE ATLANTIC 
United States (*. e., east of the Mississippi) represented by identical 
OR STRICTLY REPRESENTATIVE SPECIES, OR ELSE BY LESS INTIMATELY 
RELATED SPECIES (THE LATTER INCLUDED IN PARENTHESES). 
1. In the Pacific United 2. In NortJieaslem Asia, Japan 
States. to Altai and ike Himalayas. 
Anemone Pennsylvania. 
Anemone dichotoma zz Pennsylvaniea. 

" parviflora. 
Ranunculus alismißfolius. 
Anemone parviflora ? 
Ranunculus alismsefolius. 
Ranunculus alismsefoluis. 
" Cymbalaria. 
" Gmelini. 
** Cymbalaria. 
" Gmelini. 
Cymbalaria. 
Gmelini. 
" Pennsylvamcus. 
Trautvetteria palmata. 
Hydrastis Canadensis. 
Trollius Americanus. 
M Pennsylvamcus. 
Trautvetteria palmata. 
" Pennsylvamcus . 
Trautvetteria palmata. 
Hydrastis Jesoenis. 
Trollius patulus var. = Americanus, 
Ledeb. 
Aconitum uncinatum ex Hook, f . 
Actsea spicata, var. rubra. 
Trollius Americanus var. 
Aconitum uncinatum. 
Actfea spicata, var. rubra. 
'' alba. 
Cimicifuga Americana. 
Actaea spicata, var, arguta. 
" alba ? 
Cimicifuga foetida, barely occurs 
in N. Europe also. 
(Cimicifuga Dahurica and § Pityrosperma, 
3 spp.) 
Illicium anisatiun, religiosum, 
etc. 
Cimicifuga racemosa and cordifolia. 

Illicium Floridanum and parviflorum. 

Schizandra coccinea. 
Magnolia, 7 spp. 
Menispermum Canadense. 
Uuilophyllum thalictroides. 1 
■L*'phylleia cymosa. 
Jeffersonia diphylla. 
Podophyii um peltatum. 
brasenia peltata. 
luteum. 
otylophorum diphyllum. 
(Cimicifuga elata.) 
(Scbizandra nigra, etc.) 
(Magnolia, 8-12 spp.) 
Menispermum Dahuricum. 
Caulophyllum thalictroides. 
Piphylleia Grayi. 
Jett'ersonia = Plagiorhegma dubium. 

(Podophyllum Emodi.) 
Brasenia peltata. 
Nelumbium speciosum. 
(Stylophorum Japonicum and 
lactucoides. ) 
Brasenia peltata. 
1 See Appendix, 11. 
Dicentra eximia. 
Corydalis aurea. 
Viola Selkirkii. 
" Canadensis. 
Claytonia, Virginica and Caroliniana. 

Elodes Virginica. 
" petiolata. 
Tilia Americana (American 
type). 
Tilia heterophylla. 
Stuartia, 2 spp. 
Xanthoxylum spp. 
Rhus venenata. 
"■ Toxicodendron, 
Vitis Labrusca. 
'* indivisa. 
Ampelopsis quinquefolia- 
Berchemia volubilis. 
Sageretia Michauxii. 
Celastrus scandens. 
iEsculus glabra. 
" flava and Pavia, 
** parvMora. 
Acer spicatum. 
' ' Pesineylvanfcunu 
Negundo acexoides. 
Wistaria frutescens. 
Desmodfum, many spp. 
Lespedeza spp.. 
Rhynchosia spp, 
Amphicarpsea monoica. 
Thermopsis T 3 spp. 
Cladrastis tinctoria. 
Cassia spp. 
Gleditschia triacanthos and 
monosperma. 
Neptunia lutea. 
Spiraea (Neillia) opulifolia. 
" corymbosa. 
Neviusa Al'abamensis. 
Geum macrophyllum. 
Potentilla Pennsylvanica. 
Rubus triflorus. 
" strigosus. 
Pyrus Americana and sambucifolia. 

Amelanchier Canadensis and 
vars. 
Calycanthus, 3 spp, 
Ribes Cynosbati. 
" lacustre. 
" prostratum. 
Philadelphus, 2 spp. 
Itea Virginica. 
Hydrangea, 3 spp. 
Astilbe decandra. 
Boykinia aconitifolia. 
Mitella nuda. 
" diphylla. 
Tiarella cordif olia . 
Penthorum sedoides. 
Hamamelis Virginica. 
Fothergilla alnifolia. 
Heracleum lanatum. 
Archangelica Gmelini. 
Sium lineare. 
Cryptottenia Canadensis. 
Archemora, 2 spp. 
Dicentra eximia or formosa 
Corydalis aurea var. 
Viola Canadensis var. 
Claytonia lanceolata. 
(Rhus dive*siloba.} 
(iEsculus Californica.) 
Negundo aceroides Californicum. 

(Thermopsis fabacea & sp.) 
Spiraea opulifolia. 
" betulscfolia. 
Geum macrophyllum. 
Potentilla Pennsylvania. 
Rubus strigosus. 
Pyrus sambucifolia. 
Amelanchier Canadensis 
var. 
Calycanthus occidentalis. 
(Ribes spp.) 
" setosum. 
" laxiflorum. 
Philadelphus, 2 spp. 
Boykinia occidentalis 
elata. 
Mitella nuda. 
Mitella § Mitellastra, 
spp. 
Tiarella unifoliata. 
Heracleum lanatum. 
Archangelica Gmelini. 
(Dicentra spp.) 
Corydalis aurea var., etc. 
Viola Selkirkii. 
" Canadensis var. 
(Claytonia, spp. Siberia.) 
Elodes Virginica. 
" petiolata. 
Tilia sp., American type T one of 
which reaches Hungary. 
(Stuartia, 3 spp.) 
(Xanthoxylum spp.) 
Rhus vernicifera, etc. 
" Toxicodendron. 
Vitis Labrusca. 
" humulifolia. 
([Ampelopsis tricuspidata.) 
(Berchemia racemosa, etc.) 
(Sageretia theaesans.) 
(Celastrus, 5 spp.) 
iEsculus Chinensis and Hippocastanum, 

(.iEsculus dissimilis.) 
( " Punduana Wall.) 
Acer spicatum var. 
" tegmentosum. 
(Negundo cissifolium and spp.) 
Wistaria Sinensis and spp. 
(Desmodium, several spp.) 
thermopsis fabacea. 
Amurensis.) 
'Cassia spp.) 
Sleditschia Chinensis, etc. 
(Neptunia spp.) 
(Neillia spp., Himalayas.) 
Spiraea betulsefolia. 
(Stephanandra, Kerria.) 
Geum Japonieum. 
Potentilla Pennsylvanica. 
Rubus triflorus, var. Japonicus. 
" strigosus. 
Pyrus Americana and sambucifolia. 

Amelanchier Canadensis var. 
(Chimonanthus fragrans.) 
Ribes Cynosbati. 
Pliiladelplms spp. 
(Itea spp.) 
Hydrangea, many spp. 
Astilbe Thunbergii and 
and spp. 
Saxifr. tellimioidea 
and (Boykinia? = Saxifr. tellim 
Maxim.) 
Mitella nuda, Siberia. 
etc., (Mitella § Mitellastra, sp.) 
Tiarella polyphylla. 
Penthorum sedoides ? = 
nense and huniile. 
Hamamelis Japonica, etc. 
(Corylopsis spp., etc.) 
Heracleum lanatum. 
Archangelica Gmelini. 
Sium cicutsefolium. 
Cryptotsenia Canadensis. 
(Peucedanum ? Sieboldii.) 
= Chi- 
Osmorrhiza longistylis and 
brevistylis. 
Aralia spinosa. 
" racemosa. 
" nudicaulis. 
" (Ginseng) quinquefolia. 
Cornus Canadensis. 
florida. 
stolonifera. 
Diervilla, 2 spp. 
Triosteum, 2 spp. 
Viburnum lantanoides. 
" dentatum & pubescens. 
Mitchella repens. 
Adenocaulon bicolor. 
Boltonia, spp. 
Aster § Biotia, corymbosus 
and spp. 
Aster § Conyzopsis, angustus. 
Artemisia Canadensis. 
" biennis. 
11 frigida. 
Senecio pseudo-arnica. 
Nabalus spp. 
Cacalia spp. 
Mulgedium pulchellum. 
Vaccinium § Oxycoccus mac- 
rocarpum. 
" " erythrocarpum. 
" § Batodendron, 2 spp. 
" § Cyanococcus, 15 spp. 
" ovalifolium. 
Chiogenes hispidula. 
Epigaea repens, 
Gaultheria procumbens. 
Leucothoe axillaris and Cates- 
baei. 
Leucothoe racemosa and re- 
curva. 
Andromeda § Portuna floribunda. 

Andromeda § Pieris spp. 
Clethra, 2 spp. 
Menziesia ferruginea, var. 
globularis. 
Rhododendron Catawbiense. 
" maximum. 
" punctatum. 
Rhodora Canadensis. 
Azalea, 4 spp. 
Elliottia racemosa. 
Osmorrhiza longistylis, etc. 
Aralia humilis. 
Cornus Canadensis. 
" Nuttallii. 
Viburnum ellipticum. 
Adenocaulon bicolor. 
Aster angustus. 
Artemisia Canadensis. 
biennis. 
" f rigida. 
Mulgedium pulchellum. 
Vaccinium ovalifolium. 
Menziesia globularis. 
Rhododendron Californi- 
cum. 
(Azalea occidentalis). 
j Osmorrhiza longistylis, etc. 
Aralia spinosa var. 
" edulis, etc. 
( " cordata.) 
" repens, Ginseng, etc. 
Cornus Canadensis. 
Benthamia spp. 
" alba. 
(Diervilla § Weigela, spp.) 
Triosteum sinuatum and Hima- 
laicum. 
Viburnum lantanoides (and related 
species.) 
Viburnum dilatatum, etc. 
Mitchella undulata. 
Adenocaulon adluerescens. 
(Boltonia spp.) 
Aster § Biotia, corymbosus and 
spp- 
Aster angustus — Brachyactis 
ciliata, Ledeb. 
Artemisia Canadensis ? = comu- 
tata. 
Artemisia biennis. 
" frigida. 
Senecio pseudo-arnica. 
(Nabalus ochroleucus acerif olius) 
(Cacalia spp.) 
Mulgedium Sibiricum. 
Vaccinium macrocarpum, forma 
ambigua. l 
" Japonieum (ab erythrocarpo 
vix differt). 
( " § Batodendron, spp.) 
( " § Cyanococcus, one sp. 
near Pennsylvanicum. 
" ovalifolium. 
Chiogenes hispidula. 
Epigaea Asiatica. 
Gaultheria pyroloides. 
Leucothoe Keiskei. 
( " G-rayana and Tschonoskii. ) 
(Andromeda § Portuna sp.) 
( " § Pieris spp.) 
(Clethra sp.) 
Menziesia pentandra and others. 
(Rhododeudron brachycarpum.) 
( " Metternichii.) 
( " Keiskei.) 
( " BPP-) 
(Azalea spp.) 
Tripetaleia paniculata and bracteata. 

1 "Ob flores revera terminales, bracteolas lineari-lanceolatas scariosas et folia acuta." Dr. 
Maximowicz (in "Mel. Biolog. Diagn." decas 12) refers this to V. Oxycoccus, instead of to V. 
macrocarpum. which is " semper bene distinctum floribus axillaribus, bracteolis ovatis foliaceis 
et foliis obtusis." But in one of my specimens the axis of the umbel is continued into a leafy 
shoot, as in V. macrocarpum; and the bracteolae vary from linear to ovate, and from thin 
and scarious to chartaceous or coriaceous in both species ; they are never (so far as I know) 
" foliaceous "in V. macrocarpum, but the bracteae sometimes are. The leaves are sometimes 
aeutish in the latter, and also very obtuse in V. Oxycoccus; in the Japanese specimens 
under consideration they are often half an inch in length. I must add that in the length of 
the filaments they accord with the character which I assigned to V. Oxycoccus in the Manual. 
In fact, a form combining the characters of the two species survives in Japan. 
Pyrola elliptica. 
Monotropa uniflora. 
Shortia galacifolia = Schizocodon 
uninorus. 
(Ilex § Prinos spp.) 
(Diospyros spp.) 
(Symplocos spp.) 
Tecoma grandiflora. 
Catalpa Kaempferi. 
Veronica Virginica. 
(Callicarpa; 3 spp.) 
Phryma Leptostachya. 
Lycopus parviflorus. 
Teucrium Japonieum. 
sp.) 
(Lophanthus sp.) 
Scutellaria (nueulis alatis) Guilielmi 
1 
Halenia Sibirica, and spp. 
Phlox Sibirica. 
(Gelsemium elegans.) 
Mitreola oldenlandioides. 
(Apocynum venetum.) 
Pyrola elliptica. 
Monotropa uniflora. 
Shortia galacifolia. 
Ilex § Prinos spp. 
Diospyros Virginiana. 
Symplocos sp. 
Tecoma radicans. 
Catalpa bignonioides. 
Veronica Virginica. 
Callicarpa Americana. 
Phryma Leptostachya. 
Lycopus Virginicus. 
Teucrium Canadense. 
Hedeoma, 4 spp. 
Lophanthus spp. 
Scutellaria (nuculis alatis) 
Lycopus Virginicus. 
Lophanthus spp. 
nervosa. 
Halenia deflexa. 
Phlox subulata. 
Gelsemium sempervirens. 
Mitreola, 2 spp. 
Apocynum androsaemifolium. 
(Phlox Douglasii and spp.) 
Apocynum androsgemifolium. 

(Amsonia elliptica.) 
Asarum variegatum and Blumei. 
Amsonia Tabernaemontana. 
Asarum Virginicum and arifolium. 

Asarum caudatum. 
" cauleseens and Sieboldii. 
Phytolacca K;.empferi, etc. 
Corispermum hyssopifolium. 
Polygonum perforatum. 
" sagittatum and Sieboldii. 

(Lindera triloba, etc) 
" hypoglauca, etc. 
(Tetranthera spp.) 
(Pyrularia =: Spha^rocarpa spp.) 
Saururus Loureiri. 
(Stillingia spp.) 
Pachysandra terminalis. 
Planera Japonica (and Kichardi). 
Maclura gerontogaea. 
Pilea pumila. 
Laportea evitata, etc. 
(Bcehmeria spp.) 
Parietaria debilis. 
(Juglans regia.) 
Juglans Mandchurica, stenocar- 
Asarum Canadense. 
Phytolacca decandra. 
Corispermum hyssopifolium. 
Polygonum arii olium. 
" sagittatum. 
Sassafras officinale. 
Lindera Benzoin, etc. 
Tetranthera geniculata. 
Pyrularia oleif era. 
Saururus cernuus. 
Stillingia spp. 
Pachysandra procumbens. 
Planera aquatica. 
Madura aurantiaca. 
Pilea pumila. 
Laportea Canadensis. 
Bcehmeria cylindrica. 
Parietaria debilis. 
Juglans nigra. 
" cinerea. 
(Tetranthera Californica.) 
(Juglans rupestris.) 
pa. 
Corylus rostrata, var. Mandchurica. 

Betula glandulosa. 
( " ulmifolia, etc.) 
Alnus maritima. 
(Myrica Nagi.) 
(Pinus densirlora, etc.) 
" excelsa. 
Corylus rostrata. 
Betula glandulosa. 
" nigra. 
Alnus maritima. 
Myrica cerifera. 
Pinus resinosa. 
Corylus rostrata var. 
Myrica Californica. 
Pinus monticola. 
Strobus. 
* Scutellaria GuiUelmi, n. sp. Perilomioides : slender, branched from the base, stolonifer- 
ous ? leaves membranaceous, minutely pubescent, crenately dentate, the lower round-cordate 
and slender-petioled, the others ovate or oblong with rounded or truncate base and short-petioled, 
the floral similar but gradually smaller ; flowers solitary in the axils; peduncles about 
the length of the calyx ; corolla (" light purple," only three lines long) hardly more than twice 
the length of the calyx, its lips of nearly equal length ; nutlets surrounded by an abrupt and 
reflexed denticulate wing, upper face of the disk muricate, the lower as if squamellate. S. 
hederacea? Gray, in Perry's " Japan Exped." in. p. 316, and " Bot. Contrib. Proc. Amer. Acad." 
hederacea f Gray, in Perry'* 
viii. p. 370, not of Kunth ar; 
viii. p. 370, not of Kunth and BoucheA It appears from a note by Vatke, in "Bot. Zeit.," 1872, p. 
717, that S. hederacea is identical with the Tasmanian S. humilis, and its nutlets were originally 
described as eehinulate-tuberculate, and by implication wingless. So our plant may be named 
in honor of Dr. S. W. Williams, who first collected a little of it at Simoda, Japan. Better and 
fruiting specimens were gathered on the Loo-Choo Islands, by Charles Wright. <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:51:55 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

to North America and temperate Asia ; and sixty-three (i. e., 
more than three quarters) of these are not met with in western 
North America. 
This table may be compared, or rather contrasted, with the following 
one. 
Extra-European Plants of Temperate Eastern Asia which are represented 
IDENTICALLY OR BY SOME NEAR RELATIVE IN OREGON (SOUTH 
'of Lat. 4S°) or California (Arctic-alpine Plants excluded), but 
States 
not in the Atlantic United 
Thalictrum sparsiflorum. 
Ranunculus aflhiis. 
Coptis occidentalis. 
'* brachypetala and Teeta. 
Aconitum delphinifolium. 
Poeonia spp. 
Berberis § Mahonia spp. 
Epimediu'm § Aceranthus sp. 
Achlys Japonica. 
Corydalis pfeoniaefolia. 
Moehringia umbrosa. 
Linum perenne. 
Thermopsis fabacea. 
Astragalus adsurgens. 
Chamaerhodos erecta. 
Thalictrum sparsiflorum. 
Ranunculus aflhiis. 
Coptis occidentalis. 
** asplenifolia. 
Aconitum delphinifolium. 
(Pceonia Rossii.) 
(Berberis § Mahonia spp. 
Vancouveria hexandra. 
Achlys triphylla. 
Corydalis pasoniaefolia. 
Mcehringia macrophylla. 
Llnum perenne. 
Thermopsis fabacea. 
Astragalus adsurgens. 
Chamaerhodos erecta. 
Spiraea Nobleana. 
Rubus spectabilis. 
Pyrus rivularis. 
Crataegus Douglasii. 
Rosa Kamtschatica. 
(Photlnia serrulata.) 
Saxifraga Sibirica. 
(Mitella § Mitellaria spp.) 
Glehnia littoralis. 
Oplopanax horrida. 
Echenais carlinoides. 
Spiraea callosa. 
Rubus spectabilis. 
Pyrus rivularis ? 
Crataegus sanguinea. 
Rosa Kamtschatica. 
Photinia arbutifolia. 
Saxifraga Sibirica. 
Mitella § Mitellaria spp. 
Glehnia littoralis. 
Oplopanax horrida. 
Echenais carlinoides. 
Lonicera Maximowiczii. 
Gaultheria adenothrix. 
Rhododendron ovatum and semibarba- 
Lonicera Breweri. 
Gaultheria Myrsinites. 
Rhododendron albiflorum. 
turn. 
Pyrola subaphylla. 
Villarsia Crista-Galli. 
Lycopus lucidus. 
Boschniakia glabra. 
Echinospermum patulum. 
' ' Redowskii. 
Hottuynia cordata. 
Pyrola aphylla. 
Villarsia Crista-Galli. 
Lycopus lucidus. 
Boschniakia glabra. 
Echinospermum patulum. 
" Redowskii. 
Anemiopsis Californica. 
(Quercus densiflora.) 
(Castanopsis chrysophylla.) 
Lysichiton Camtchatcense. 
Erythronium grandiflorum. 
Carex macrocephala. 
Triticum 
Elymus Sibiricus. 
Abies Menziesii. 
Woodwardia radicans. 
Quercus spp. 
Castanopsis spp. 
Lysichiton Camtschatcense. 
Erythronium grandiflorum. 
Carex macrocephala. 
Triticum ysgilopoides. 
Elymus Sibiricus. 
Abies Menziesii. 
Woodwardia radicans. 
; and the representation, when at 
identical species. Only seven of 
The entries are only forty-five 
all close, is by identical or nearly 
the genera here noted are peculiar to northeastern Asia and north- 
western America: namely, Glehnia, Oplopanax, and Lysichiton, 
each of a single species common to both coasts ; Achlys, of which 
there is a Japanese species said to differ from the American ; Bosch- 
niakia, of a common high northern species, and a peculiar one in 
California; Echinais, of one or two Asiatic species, one of them 
lately found in California and Colorado, but possibly of recent introduction 
; and Castanopsis, a rather large and characteristic east 
Asian genus, represented by a single but very distinct species in 
Oregon and California. 
Small, under the circumstances, as is the number of cognate plants 
or forms in these two floras, it is large in comparison with those 
which are peculiar to the United States and Europe, excluding, as 
before, all Arctic-alpine species. The following seem to be the 
principal : — 
Anemone nemorosa, of which there is a peculiar Pacific form, perhaps 
reaching the eastern borders of Asia. 
Myosorus minimus, which may be a recently introduced plant. 
Cakile, a maritime genus. 
Saxifraga aizoides. 
Bellis integrifolia, which may be compared with the European 
B. annua. 
Lobelia Dortmanna. 
Primula Mistassinica. 
Centunculus lanceolatus, a mere form of C. minimus. 
Hottonia inflata, which represents H. palustris. 
Utricularia minor. 
Salicornia Virginica, the S. mucronata of Bigelow and probably 
of Lagasca also. 
Corema Conradi, representing the Portuguese C. alba. 
Vallisneria spiralis, which appears to be absent from northern 
Asia. 
Spiranthes Romanzoviana, with its single station on the Irish 
coast. It extends across the American continent well northward, 
but seemingly not into the adjacent parts of Asia. 
Eriocaulon septangulare, restricted in the Old World to a few 
stations on west British coasts. 
Carex externa, C.flaeca (or Barrattii), and one or two others. 
Cinna arundinacea, var. pendula. 
Leersia oryzoides. 
Spartina stricta and S. juneea. 
Equisetum Telmateia. 
Lycopodium inundalum. 
Calluna vulgaris, which holds as small and precarious a tenure 
on this continent as Spiranthes Romanzoviana does in Europe. 
Barely two dozen ; and three or four of these are more or less 
maritime. Only two or three of them extend west of the Mississippi 
Valley. 
Narthecium is not in the list, a form or near ally of the European 
and Atlantic-American species having been detected in Japan ; the 
genus is unknown on the Pacific side of our continent. 
11. 
Since the foregoing tables were prepared, a letter from Mr. Dall 
(who has returned from an arduous and successful exploration of the 
Alaskan region, made under the authority of the United States Coast 
Survey) informs me that his party met with Caulophyllum upon one 
of the Shumagin Islands. These islands lie off the southern shore 
of the peninsula of Alaska, about in latitude 55°, longitude 160°. 
No specimen occurs in the beautiful collection of dried plants made 
in this expedition, mainly by Mr. Harrington ; nor indeed any other 
plants which affect so southern a range as our Caulophyllum. Yet 
the plant may well have been rightly identified ; although it should 
be seen by botanists before any conclusions are drawn from it. But 
the occurrence of an intermediate station like this would probably 
lead Professor Grisebach to rank the north Asiatic Caulophyllum 
no longer as a representative species, but as identical with our Atlantic 
plant, as Miquel and Maximowicz, as well as myself, have 
already done upon evidence derived from the specimens. 
Then, — upon Professor Grisebach's idea that, while identical 
species are to be referred to a single origin and the disseverance 
accounted for through means and causes now in operation, representative 
species have somehow arisen independently under similar 
climates, — Caulophyllum must be explained as a case of migration, 
but Diphylleia (in the same predicament, only with a perceptible 
difference between the two plants) as a case of double origination. 
So of the Shortia galacifolia and the Schizocodon uniflorus, of 
which the corolla and stamens in both are still wanting. If these, 
when found, should prove to be exactly alike in the two, the very 
difficult problem of accounting for the world-wide separation under 
present circumstances is to be encountered ; if a difference appears, 
the problem is to consider how, and upon what, similar climates can 
have acted to have originated almost identical species upon opposite 
sides of the world. Professor Grisebach's views imply that " each 
species has arisen under the influence of physical and other external 
conditions," and that gradual alterations in a climate somehow pro- 
duce adaptive " changes in organization " ; wherefore, as the President 
of the Linnsean Society has aptly remarked, 1 "We have a right 
to ask of him, What is the previous organization upon which he 
imagines climate to have worked to produce allied species in one 
region and representative species in distant regions ? " The difference 
here between Grisebach's conception and our own is, that we 
consider climate and other external conditions to have acted upon 
common ancestors in each case ; but he apparently declines to conjecture 
what they acted upon. 
In conclusion I may advert to one instance, in which it would appear, 
either that widely different climates have originated the same 
or closely similar species, or else that one and the same species (one 
of those common to the United States and Japan) has been dispersed 
over the globe in a manner and to an extent that place it beyond 
the reach of explanations limited to the results of forces still 
in activity and means of dispersion still available. Brasenia peltata 
inhabits : 1. The Atlantic United States, from Canada to Texas ; 2. 
Oregon, or rather Washington Territory, a single known station at 
Gray's Harbor, on the Pacific, latitude 47° ; and Clear Lake, in 
California, latitude 39° ; 3. Japan ; 4. Khasya and Bhotan, altitude 
4_6000 feet ; 5. Australia, Moreton Bay, etc. ; 6. West Africa, in 
a lake in Angola ! 
1 Address of George Bentham, Esq , President of the Lhuuenn Society, 
etc., read May 24, 1872. 
DO VARIETIES WEAR OUT OR TEND TO WEAR OUT? 
This question has been argued from time to time for more 
than half a century, and is far from being settled yet. Indeed, 
it is not to be settled either way so easily as is sometimes 
thought. The result of a prolonged and rather lively 
discussion of the topic about forty years ago in England, in 
which Lindley bore a leading part on the negative side, was, 
if we rightly remember, that the nays had the best of the 
argument. The deniers could fairly well explain away the 
facts adduced by the other side, and evade the force of the 
reasons then assigned to prove that varieties were bound to 
die out in the course of time. But if the case were fully reargued 
now, it is by no means certain that the nays would 
win it. The most they could expect would be the Scotch 
verdict " not proven." And this not because much, if any, 
additional evidence of the actual wearing out of any variety 
has turned up since, but because a presumption has been 
raised under which the evidence would take a bias the other 
way. There is now in the minds of scientific men some reason 
to expect that certain varieties would die out in the long run, 
and this might have an important influence upon the interpretation 
of the facts that would be brought forward. Curiously 
enough, however, the recent discussions to which our 
attention has been called seem, on both sides, to have overlooked 
this matter. 
But, first of all, the question needs to be more specifically 
stated if any good is to come from a discussion of it. There 
are varieties and varieties. They may, some of them, disappear 
or deteriorate, but yet not wear out — not come to an 
end from any inherent cause. One might even say, the 
younger they are the less chance of survival unless well cared 
1 New York Tribune, semi-weekly edition, December 8, 1874. 
for. They may be smothered out by the adverse force of 
superior numbers ; they are even more likely to be bred out 
of existence by unprevented cross-fertilization, or to disappear 
from mere change of fashion. The question, however is not 
so much about reversion to an ancestral state, or the falling 
off of a high-bred stock into an inferior condition. Of such 
cases it is enough to say that, when a variety or strain of 
animal or vegetable is led up to unusual fecundity or size or 
product of any organ, for our good, and not for the good of 
the plant or animal itself, it can be kept so only by high feeding 
and exceptional care ; and that with high feeding and 
artificial appliances come vastly increased liability to disease, 
which may practically annihilate the race. But then the race, 
like the bursted boiler, could not be said to wear out, while 
if left to ordinary conditions, and allowed to degenerate back 
into a more natural, if less useful state, its hold on life would 
evidently be increased rather than diminished. 
As to natural varieties or races under normal conditions, 
sexually propagated, it could readily be shown that they are 
neither more nor less likely to disappear from any inherent 
cause than the species from which they originated. Whether 
species wear out, i. e., have their rise, culmination, and decline 
from any inherent cause, is wholly a geological and very speculative 
problem, upon which, indeed, only vague conjectures can 
be offered. The matter actually under discussion concerns 
cultivated domesticated varieties only, and, as to plants, is 
covered by two questions. 
First : Will races propagated by seed, being so fixed that 
they come true to seed, and purely bred (not crossed with 
any other sort), continue so indefinitely, or will they run out 
m time — not die out, perhaps, but lose their distinguishing 
characters ? Upon this, all we are able to say is, that we know 
no reason why they should wear out or deteriorate from any 
inherent cause. The transient existence or the deterioration 
and disappearance of many such races are sufficiently accounted 
for otherwise ; as in the case of extraordinarily exuberant 
varieties, such as mammoth fruits or roots, by increased 
liability to disease, already adverted to, or by the failure of 
the high feeding they demand. A common cause, in ordinary 
cases, is cross-breeding, through the agency of wind or insects, 
which is difficult to guard against. Or they go out of fashion 
and are superseded by others thought to be better, and so the 
old ones disappear. 
Or, finally, they revert to an ancestral form. As offspringtend 
to resemble grandparents almost as much as parents, 
and as a line of close-bred ancestry is generally prepotent, so 
newly originated varieties have always a tendency to reversion. 
This is pretty sure to show itself in some of the progeny 
of the earlier generations, and the breeder has to guard 
against it by rigid selection. But the older the variety is — • 
that is, the longer the series of generations in which it has 
come true from seed — the less the chance of reversion : for 
now, to be like the immediate parent, is also to be like a long 
line of ancestry ; and so all the influences concerned — that 
is, both parental and ancestral heritability — act in one and 
the same direction. So, since the older a race is the more 
reason it has to continue true, the presumption of the unlimited 
permanence of old races is very strong. 
Of course the race itself may give off new varieties ; but 
that is no interference with the vitality of the original stock. 
If some of the new varieties supplant the old, that will not be 
because the unvaried stock is worn out or decrepit with age, 
but because in wild nature the newer forms are better adapted 
to the surroundings, or, under man's care, better adapted to his 
wants or fancies. 
The second question, and one upon which the discussion 
about the wearing out of varieties generally turns, is : Will 
varieties propagated from buds, i. e., by division, grafts, 
bulbs, tubers and the like, necessarily deteriorate and die out? 
First, Do they die out as a matter of fact ? Upon this, the 
testimony has all along been conflicting. Andrew Knight 
was sure that they do, and there could hardly be a more 
trustworthy witness. 
" The fact," he says, fifty years ago, " that certain varieties 
of some species of fruit which have been long cultivated cannot 
now be made to grow in the same soils and under the 
same mode of management which was a century ago so perfectly 
successful, is placed beyond the reach of controversy. 
Every experiment which seemed to afford the slightest prospect 
of success was tried by myself and others to propagate 
the old varieties of the Apple and Pear which formerly constituted 
the orchards of Herefordshire, without a shiirle 
healthy or efficient tree having been obtained ; and I believe 
all attempts to propagate these varieties have, during some 
years, wholly ceased to be made." 
To this it was replied, in that and the next generation, 
that cultivated vines have been transmitted by perpetual division 
from the time of the Romans, and that several of the 
sorts, still prized and prolific, are well identified, among them 
the ancient Grsecula, considered to be the modern Corinth or 
Currant grape, which has immemorially been seedless ; that 
the old Nonpareil apple was known in the time of Queen 
Elizabeth ; that the White Beurre pears of France have been 
propagated from earliest times ; and that Golden pippins, 
St. Michael pears, and others said to have run out, were still 
to be had in good condition. 
Coming down to the present year, a glance through the 
proceedings of pomological societies and the debates of farmers' 
clubs, bring out the same difference of opinion. The 
testimony is nearly equally divided. Perhaps the larger number 
speak of the deterioration and failure of particular old 
sorts ; but when the question turns on " wearing out," the 
positive evidence of vigorous trees and sound fruits is most 
telling. A little positive testimony outweighs a good deal of 
negative. This cannot readily be explained away, while the 
failure may be, by exhaustion of soil, incoming of disease, or 
alteration of climate or circumstances. On the other hand 
it may be urged, that, if a variety of this sort is fated to become 
decrepit and die out, it is not bound to die out all at 
once or everywhere at the same time. It would be expected 
first to give way wherever it was weakest, from whatever 
cause. This consideration has an important bearing upon the 
final question, Are old varieties of this kind on the way to die 
out on account of their age or any inherent limit of vitality ? 
Here, again, Mr. Knight took an extreme view. In his 
essay in the " Philosophical Transactions," published in the 
year 1810, he propounded the theory, not merely of a natural 
limit to varieties from grafts and cuttings, but even that they 
would not survive the natural term of the life of the seedling 
trees from which they were originally taken. Whatever may 
have been his view of the natural term of the life of a tree, and 
of a cutting being merely a part of the individual that produced 
it, there is no doubt that he laid himself open to the 
effective replies which were made from all sides at the time, 
and have lost none of their force since. Weeping- Willows, 
Bread-fruits, Bananas, Sugar-cane, Tiger-lilies, Jerusalem 
Artichokes, and the like, have been propagated for a long 
time in this way, without evident decadence. 
Moreover, the analogy upon which his hypothesis is founded 
will not hold. Whether or not one adopts the present writer's 
conception, that individuality is not actually reached or 
maintained in the vegetable world, it is clear enough that a 
common plant or tree is not an individual in the sense that a 
horse or man, or any one of the higher animals is — that it is 
an individual only in the sense that a branching zoophyte or 
mass of coral is. Solvitur crescendo: the tree and the branch 
equally demonstrate that they are not individuals, by being 
divided with impunity and advantage, with no loss of life but 
much increase. It looks odd enough to see a writer like Mr. 
Sisley reproducing the old hypothesis in so bare a form as 
this : " I am prepared to maintain that varieties are individuals, 
and as they are born they must die, like other individuals." 
"We know that Oaks, Sequoias and other trees live 
several centuries, but how many we do not exactly know. 
But that they must die no one in his senses will dispute." 
Now what people in their senses do dispute is, not that the 
tree will die, but that other trees, established from cuttings of 
it, will die with it. 
But does it follow from this that non-sexually propagated 
varieties are endowed with the same power of unlimited duration 
that are possessed by varieties and species propagated 
sexually —i.e. by seed ? Those who think so jump too soon 
at their conclusion. For, as to the facts, it is not enough to 
point out the diseases or the trouble in the soil and in the atmosphere, 
to which certain old fruits are succumbing, nor to 
prove that a parasitic fungus (Peronospora infestans) is what 
is the matter with potatoes. For how else would constitutional 
debility, if such there be, more naturally manifest itself 
than in such increased liability or diminished resistance to 
such attacks ? And if you say that, anyhow, such varieties 
do not die of old age, — meaning that each individual attacked 
does not die of old age, but of manifest disease, —it 
may be asked in return, What individual man ever dies of old 
age in any other sense than of a similar inability to resist invasions 
which in earlier years would have produced no noticeable 
effect ? Aged people die of a slight cold or a slight accident, 
but the inevitable weakness that attends old age is what 
makes these slight attacks fatal. 
Finally, there is a philosophical argument which tells 
strongly for some limitations of the duration of non-sexuallypropagated 
forms, one that Knight probably never thought 
of, but which we should not have expected recent writers to 
overlook. When Mr. Darwin announced that the principle of 
cross-fertilization between the individuals of a species is the 
plan of nature, and is practically so universal that it fairly 
sustains his inference that no hermaphrodite species continually 
self-fertilized would continue to exist, he made it clear to 
all who apprehend and receive the principle, that a series 
of plants propagated by buds only must have a weaker hold 
of life than a series reproduced by seed. For the former is 
the closest kind of breeding. Upon this ground such varieties 
may be expected ultimately to die out ; but the mills of 
the gods grind so exceeding slow that we cannot say that 
any particular grist has been actually ground out under human 
observation. 
If it be asked how the asserted principle is proved or made 
Probable, we can here merely say that the proof is wholly inferential. 
But the inference is drawn from such a vast array 
of facts that it is wellnigh irresistible. It is the legitimate 
explanation of those arrangements in nature to secure cross- 
fertilization in the species, either constantly or occasionally, 
which are so general, so varied and diverse, and we may add 
so exquisite and wonderful, that, once propounded, we see 
that it must be true. What else, indeed, is the meaning and 
use of sexual reproduction ? Not simply increase in numbers 
; for that is otherwise effectually provided for by budding 
propagation in plants and many of the lower animals. 
There are plants, indeed, of the lower sort, in which the whole 
multiplication takes place in this way, and with great rapidity. 
These also have sexual reproduction ; but in it two old individuals 
are always destroyed to make a single new one ! Here 
propagation diminishes the number of individuals fifty per 
cent. Who can suppose that such a costly process as this, 
and that all the exquisite arrangements for cross-fertilization 
in hermaphrodite plants, do not subserve some most important 
purpose ? How and why the union of two organisms, or 
generally of two very minute portions of them, should reinforce 
vitality, we do not know and can hardly conjecture. 
But this must be the meaning of sexual reproduction. 
The conclusion of the matter from the scientific point of 
view is, that sexually propagated varieties, or races, although 
liable to disappear through change, need not be expected to 
wear out, and there is no proof that they do ; but that nonsexually 
propagated varieties, though not liable to change, 
may theoretically be expected to wear out, but to be a very 
long time about it. 
ÆSTIVATION AND ITS TERMINOLOGY. 
The term asstivation, to denote the arrangement of the 
parts of the calyx, corolla, etc., in the bud, as well as that of 
vernation for leaves in a leaf-bud, was introduced by Linnaeus. 
He did not elaborate the former subject as he did the latter, 
and the few terms given to the modes he recognized are for 
the most part defined merely by a reference to their use in 
vernation. as a botanical character is comparatively 
recent, and its terminology is not yet quite satisfactorily 
settled. I propose to consider, (1) what the leading modes 
are, and (2) how they are to be designated. 
(1) In the first place, the modes of asstivation may be conveniently 
divided into two classes, those in which the parts 
overlap, and those in which they do not. 
Of overlapping aestivation, only two principal kinds need 
be primarily distinguished, namely : 1. where some pieces 
overlap and others are overlapped, i. e., some have both 
margins exterior and others both margins interior or covered 
; 2. where each piece of a circle is overlapped by its 
neighbor on one side while it overlaps its neighbor on the 
other. There are mixtures and subordinate modifications of 
these two, but no third mode. 
In aestivation without overlapping, there is, first, the rare 
case in which the parts of the whorl or cycle never come into 
contact in the bud ; and, secondly, that in which they impinge 
by their edges only. There is also the case in which both 
margins of each piece are rolled or bent inward, and the rarer 
one in which they are turned outward ; and the apex of each 
piece may comport itself in any of these ways. But these 
dispositions are those of the pieces or leaves taken separately, 
and the terms applied to them are the same as in vernation or 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., x. 339. (1875.) 
prefoliation, are used in the same sense, and so are not at all 
peculiar to aestivation or prefloration. The like may be said 
of a remaining mode, which belongs, however, to a different 
category, that in which the parts being united into a tube or 
cup, this is bodily plaited into folds, or otherwise disposed ; 
in which case the margin of the tube or cup, or such lobes as 
it may have, may exhibit any of the modes of aestivation above 
indicated. 
Without further notice, then, of this last, the plicate or 
plaited aestivation, and of analogous conformations of the tube 
or cup of a calyx or corolla, or of the disposition of each piece 
individually (whether revolute, involute, reflexed, indexed, 
and the like), about the terminology of which there is no 
question, — omitting, likewise, for the latter reason, the case 
of open aestivation, — there are left three types to deal with : 
I. With some pieces of the set wholly exterior in the bud 
to others. 
11. With each piece covered at one margin, and covering 
by the other. 
111. With each piece squarely abutting against its neighbors 
on either side, without overlapping. 
In modes II and 111, the pieces are all on the same level 
and are to be viewed as members of a whorl. In mode I, although 
they may sometimes be members of a whorl, some 
parts of which have become external to others in the course 
of growth, they may, and in many cases must belong either to 
two or more successive whorls (as in the corolla of Papaveracece, 
and even the calyx of Crucifercje, the upper or inner 
of course covered by the lower or outer), or to the spiral 
phyllotaxy of alternate leaves. 
The type of the latter, and the common disposition when 
the parts are five, is with two pieces exterior, the third exterior 
by one edge and interior by the other, and two wholly 
interior. This is simply a cycle in f phyllotaxy, the third 
piece being necessarily within and covered at one margin by 
the first, while it is exterior to and with its other marsrin 
covers the fifth, this and the fourth being of course wholly interior. 
So, likewise, when the parts are three, one exterior, 
one half exterior, and one interior or overlapped, the aestivation 
accords with J phyllotaxy. When of eight or higher 
numbers the spiral order is usually all the more manifest. 
When of four or six, the case is one of whorls (opposite 
leaves representing the simplest whorl), either of a pair of 
whorls (as in Epimedium, Berberis, etc.), or a single whorl, 
the parts of which have overlapped in cyclic order. 
(2) As to the terminology. Linnaeus in the " Philosophia 
Botanica " treats only of vernation, there termed " Foliatio." 
For this the former term was substituted, and that of aestivation 
for the disposition of petals in a flower-bud, introduced, as I 
suppose (not having the volume to consult), in the Termini 
Botanici, published in the sixth volume of the " Amoenitates 
Academicae," 1762. I refer to it only through Giseke's edition, 
1781. Here the terms are convoluta, imbricata, conduplicata, 
defined only by reference to the section vernatio, and 
valvata, unhappily explained by a reference to the glumes of 
Grasses, also " inaequivalvis ; si magnitudine discrepant." 
Imbricata is the only term besides valvata which directly 
relates to the arrangement of petals, etc., inter se ; and the 
reference takes us back to something " tectus, ut nudus non 
appareat," covered as with tiles, we may infer. In the " Philosophia 
Botanica," under the section Foliatio, the definition 
of imbricata is " quando parallele, superficie recta, sibi invicem 
incumbunt." This would apply either to mode I, or 
mode 11, according as invicem is understood ; but the diagram 
(tab. x. 6) shows that case lis intended. Convoluta 
refers to the rolling of a petal or leaf by itself, as does conduplicata 
to its folding ; but Linnaeus gives two figures, one 
of a single rolled-up leaf, the other of one leaf rolled up within 
another. 
Finally, among the modes of vernation indicated by Linnaeus, 
there is one which it is important here to notice, relating 
as it does to the arrangement of a pair of leaves in the 
bud, and evidently quite as applicable to a whorl of a larger 
number of parts than two ; i. e. : 
" Obvoluta, quum margines alterni comprehendunt oppositi 
folii marginem rectum " (Philosophia Botanica, 105). 
Or, in Termini Botanici, " pagina superiore lateribus approximatis 
ita ut alteram latus distinguat alteram folium." 
This, as the definition and the diagram in the " Philosophia 
Botanica " show, answers in aestivation to mode 11. It was 
early taken up as such by Mirbel (Elem. Phys. Veg. et Bot., 
1815, ii. 738, 739), where the polypetalous corolla of Hermannia 
and Oxalis and the gamopetalous corolla of Apocyneai 
are cited as examples. 
Valvate aestivation, our mode 111, is rightly defined by 
Mirbel in the same place, and still earlier by Brown. 
Linnaeus made no use of aestivation as a character. Nor 
did Jussieu, except merely that, in his " Genera Plantarum," 
the petals of Malvaviscus are said to be convolute. 
In De Candolle's " Theorie Elementaire," 1813 — a still 
unsurpassed treatise, upon which, next to the " Philosophia 
Botanica," our botanical glossology rests — neither the word 
aestivation, nor its synonym, pignoration, is mentioned, and 
even vernation or prefoliation is equally omitted. 
But the history of aestivation as a botanical character began 
in a work published three years earlier, namely, in R. 
Brown's " Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae," 1810. The 
preface notes that it was first accurately observed by Grew. 
In it Brown defines only the valvate mode, "übi margines 
foliolorum vel laciniarum integumenti invicein applicati sunt, 
capsulae valvularum in modum." In the body of the work, 
wherever it is important, the aestivation is noted as valvate, 
imbricate, plicate, induplicate, etc. ; and the open aestivation 
(aperta) is named by him in a subsequent paper. 
Being the first to employ aestivation systematically, and to 
develop its value, Brown's terminology for its modes may well 
be considered authoritative. And so indeed it is, as far as it 
goes. But he did not make one important distinction, namely, 
that between our I and 11. Imbricate, in his use, comprises 
all kinds of overlapping, that of the corolla of Apocyneai and 
of a Gentian, as well as that of a Primrose. He must have 
not only noticed the difference, but also appreciated its general 
importance, notwithstanding the occasional passage of 
the one into the other. He must have also observed that in 
many cases, as in Asclepias for instance, the mode II passes 
into mode 111, the valvate, and may possibly have discerned 
that under a phyllotaxic view these are more nearly related 
than either is to mode I. I find, however, only one instance 
in which he has indicated the distinction, namely, in the character 
of Burchellia, furnished to the " Botanical Register," 
t. 435, 1820. Of its corolla it is said : " aestivatione mutuo 
imbricata contorta." The phrase is interesting, as it seems 
to recognize the distinction between the mode of overlapping 
(which is that of our mode II) and the torsion, which only 
now and then accompanies it. Looking over the " Plantae 
Javanicae Rariores " to see if there is any later use, I find no 
instance in which Brown has occasion to speak of this mode 
II ; but it occurs in the portion of his associate, Mr. Bennett, 
who (on p. 212) describes the petals of Sonerila as " aestivatione 
convoluta." Had this term been thus employed by 
Brown himself, and at an earlier date, I should regard the 
terminology of these three modes of aestivation as settled, 
namely : I, imbricata, 11, convoluta, 111, valvata. The first 
and the third are established beyond question, although somewhat 
remains to be said about the first. 
But meanwhile another use has prevailed as respects the 
second. In De Candolle's "Prodromus," the first general or 
considerable work after Brown in which terms of aestivation 
are employed, this mode is almost uniformly characterized 
as contorta. I cannot at this moment trace the term to its 
origin. It was probably suggested by the name Contortce, said 
to have been given by Linnaeus to the Apocyneous natural 
order ; and it seemed appropriate to the instances in which 
the strong convolution of rounded petals, as in Oxalis, or 
their lobes, as in Phlox, give an appearance like that of twisting, 
although there is no twist or torsion. But it is to just 
such cases, in which there is most of seeming twisting on 
account of the strong convolution, that the term convolute is 
now and then assigned in the " Prodromus" : as in the character 
of Byttneriaceai, and that of Malvaviscus. The latter 
may perhaps be explained by the peculiarity that the petals 
do not uncoil in anthesis. But in Apocynaceai, in the " Pro- 
dromus," the terms convoluta and contorta are seemingly 
employed synonymously, or nearly so (the latter most frequently) 
; at least I see no difference between the aestivation 
of Allamanda, said to be contorted, and that of Vinca (rosea), 
said to be convolute. Endlicher in this regard follows the 
" Prodromus." In the new " Genera Plantarum "by Bentham 
and Hooker this mode is most commonly designated as 
contorta, sometimes as contorto-imbricata, rarely (Philadelphus, 
etc.) convoluta. I have myself, from a period as early 
as 1840, employed the term convolute, thinking it unadvisable 
to have two names for the same thing, and wishing to 
restrict, if it might be, the term contorted to cases of torsion. 
Adrien de Jussieu, on the other hand, used convolute (with 
strict Linnaean propriety) for regular imbrication with a high 
degree of overlapping, thus giving two names to different degrees 
of the same thing. 
It being conceded, I presume, that the mode II should be 
specifically distinguished, what name, on the whole, ought it 
to bear ? If we follow prevalent usage, contorta will be the 
term. But this term was unknown in this sense to the founders 
of aestivation, Linnaeus and Brown ; it correctly expresses 
the real state of things in only a few cases ; and where there 
is torsion, it leads to a most awkward way of expressing it. 
We have to write — " lobes of the corolla contorted and 
twisted : corollae lobi contorti et torti," introducing dextrorsum 
or sinistrorsum, 1 to express the direction of the overlapping 
and of the torsion, which are not always the same. So 
the most current name is the least appropriate. Convoluta 
is as good a name as can be, and its use in the present sense 
is not unconformable with the Linnaean use in vernation. 
When well carried out, three or five or more petals, as the 
case may be, are simply rolled up together. When the overlapping 
is slight, there is simply the tendency to convolution. 
But if, as in other nomenclature, priority gives a paramount 
1 I note with satisfaction that Bentham and Hooker use these terms to 
signify from left to right, or from right to left, of a person, supposed to 
stand outside of the closed bud, which is surely the natural position of the 
observer. 
claim, obvoluta will be the proper term, beginning as it did 
with Linnaeus for vernation, and taken up, as it was very 
early, by Mirbel for aestivation. The only objections to it 
are, first, that it has never come into systematic use, and, second, 
that ob, in the composition of botanical terms, commonly 
stands for obversely or inversely. But obvoluta is not burdened 
with this signification : it is classical for " wrapped 
round," as is convoluta for rolled together. I conclude that 
one or the other of these two terms ought to be used. 
Finally, although there is little, if any, practical misuse, 
there is some mis-definition, of the term imbricate as applied 
to aestivation. Adrien de Jussieu defines it well (in Cours 
Elementaire, 308) m the phrase "La prefloraison spirale est 
aussi nomme imbriquee " ; and in noting that when the number 
stops at five, the pieces fall into two exterior, two interior, 
and one (the third in the spiral) intermediate, this making 
what is called " aestivatio quincuneialis." 1 This is clear and 
to the point. But other authors have had a fancy for distinguishing 
between quincuncial and imbricate (as if the former 
were not the typical case of the latter when the parts are five), 
and so have had to devise something else to answer to imbricate. 
Alphonse De Candolle (in his Introd. Bot., i. 154, 
written before phyllotaxy was well understood), after relegating 
imbricative to the category of a crowd of verticils, 
and remarking that the quincuncial is sometimes confounded 
with the imbricate, adds that some confound also under this 
latter name the case in which there is one exterior piece, one 
interior, and three covered at one margin but free at the other, 
I know not where this began ; but its latest reproduction is in 
Le Maout and Decaisne's " Traite Generate " and in the English 
translation of it. In the diagram the pieces are numbered 
directly round the circle from 1 to 5, the fifth coming next 
the first : "so they thus complete one turn of a spiral," — 
which shows that Le Maout had vague ideas of phyllotaxy, of 
1 The name quincuncial answers the purpose after definition, and has 
long been in use ; hut this arrangement in diagram is wholly unlike the 
quincunx, with its four pieces or stars in the periphery, or at the angles 
of a square, and one in the centre. 
which he seems to have invented a new (£) order. Moreover, 
this is essentially identical with the " cochlear " aestivation 
of the same work (not of Lindley) ; and Eichler, in his " Bliithendiagramme," 
adopts this name (unsuitable though it 
be) for this particular arrangement, whatever be the position 
of the inclosed or inclosing petal. A glance shows that this 
supposed " true imbricate aestivation " is a slight and not very 
uncommon deviation (by the displacement of what should be 
the interior margin of one of the petals during growth) of the 
mode 11, variously termed obvolute, convolute, or contorted 
aestivation. But it is so intermediate between this and the 
quincuncially imbricate as perhaps to justify Brown in applying 
the name imbricate generically to all the overlapping 
modes. I see, since the above was written, that Eichler, in 
his " Bliithendiagramme," in effect does this. I find also, 
that Eichler uniformly employs the term convolute, or convolutive, 
as I have done, instead of contorted. I should hope, 
rather than immediately expect, that this use would become 
general. 
A PILGRIMAGE TO TORREYA. 
Ordered to go south until I should meet the tardy spring 
and summer, I was expected to follow the beaten track to 
east Florida. But I wished rather to avoid the crowd of invalids 
and pleasure travelers, and turned my attention in 
preference to western Florida, determined that, if possible, I 
would make a pious pilgrimage to the secluded native haunts 
of that rarest of trees, the Torreya taxifolia. 
All that I knew, or could at the moment learn, was, that 
this peculiar evergreen Yew-like tree — prized by arboriculturists 
for its elegance, and dear to us botanists for the name 
it bears and commemorates — grew on the banks of the Apalachicola 
River, somewhere near the confluence of the Flint 
and Chattahoochee, which by their union form it. It was there 
discovered, nearly forty years ago, by Mr. Hardy B. Croom, 
and had since been seen, at two or three stations, by his surviving 
associate Dr. Chapman, of Apalachicola, author of the 
Southern Flora. Mr. Croom, upon ascertaining that he was 
the fortunate discoverer of an entirely new type of coniferous 
trees, desired that it should bear Dr. Torrey's name ; and the 
genus Torreya was accordingly so named and characterized 
by the Scotch botanist Amott. It is of the Yew family, in 
foliage and in male flowers much resembling the Yew itself, 
but more graceful than the European Yew-tree, wholly destitute 
of the berry-like cup which characterizes the latter 
genus, and with the naked seed itself fleshly-coated, and larger 
than an olive, which it resembles in shape and appearance. 
One young tree, brought or sent by Mr. Croom himself, has 
been kept alive at New York — - showing its aptitude for a 
colder climate than that of which it is a native — and has been 
more or less multiplied by cuttings. 2 Sprigs from this tree 
1 " American Agriculturist," 1875, 262. 
5 " The American Agriculturist " for May states that the tree spoken 
or its progeny were appropriately borne by the members of 
the Torrey Botanical Club, at its founder's funeral, two years 
ago, and laid upon his coffin. But very few botanists have 
ever seen the tree growing wild and in its full development. 
I was desirous to be one of the number. 
Among the broad, black lines with which the railway map 
is chequered, I found one which terminates at Chattahoochee. 
This was the objective point, and the way to it seemed plain 
enough, though long. Pilgrimages to famous shrines by railway, 
in the Old World, are nowadays systematized and made 
easy. The untried one which I undertook appeared to offer no 
privation or difficulty, except the uncertainty whether I should 
be fortunate enough to find the grove which I sought. And, 
indeed, there was little privation to speak of. It was, however, 
rather trying to us (i. e., to myself and my companion 
in travel and life), when, after leaving Savannah on an early 
April morning, with the assured understanding that we should 
reach Chattahoochee late that evening, we learned that we were 
to be left for twenty hours at a small hamlet on the borders 
of east Florida, named Live Oak, a manifest lucus a non 
lucendo, as there were no Live Oak-trees in the" neighborhood, 
but a prevalent growth of Long-leaved Pines. There 
was some good botanizing to console us, and, thanks to the 
railroad conductor for directing us aright, unpretending but 
truly comfortable quarters for the night. Then, the next day, 
resuming our journey after a twelve-o'clock dinner, which we 
were to mend with a supper at Tallahassee, we were at length 
informed that we were to be supperless ; that the stations 
both of Tallahassee and Quincy were out of town and out of 
reach of all edibles ; that Chattahoochee station, to be reached 
after ten o'clock, was only a freight-house on the wild and 
wooded bank of the river, built upon piles in the swamp, 
of, or its seed, " was brought from Florida by the late distinguished Major 
Le Conte." lam confident that this is a mistake, and that Le Conte knew 
nothing of this tree in its native station. If my recollection is correct, at 
least two seedling trees were placed in Dr. Torrey's hands by Mr. Croom, 
one of which was consigned to A. J. Downing, of Newburgh, the ultimate 
fate of which is unknown to me, the other to Mr. Hogg, senior, which, as 
" The American Agriculturist " states, is now in Central Park. 
reached at ordinary times over a mile of trestles, and now so 
overflowed that it probably could not be reached at all, certainly 
not that night ; that the train would stop for the night 
two or three miles back in the woods, where the agent had 
taken up his abode in a box-car ; that the town of Chattahoochee, 
a mile away, large as it appeared on the map, consisted 
mainly of a state-prison, and a couple of grocery shops, neither 
of-which was quite proper for passing a night in, even if we 
could reach it ; in fine, that our only course would be to sleep 
in the car (which made no provision for it), and crave from 
the agent of the road a share of his breakfast. 
The kind and intelligent fellow-travelers as far as Tallahassee 
and Quincy, who gave us this disheartening information, 
finding that we were not disposed to stop short of our 
object, remarked that they had set us down as eminently 
philosophical people, since we had passed a night at Live 
Oak and still possessed our souls in patience (a view which 
a couple who had stopped at the hotel there practically confirmed), 
and so left us with their good wishes, but evidently 
faint hopes. The weekly steamboat, which was to call at the 
landing next day, would eventually relieve us ; and so we 
resolved to make the best of it. The worthy young conductor, 
who was to sleep in the car also, kindly proffered a share of 
his supper ; but we fortunately had a bottle of cold tea, some 
crusts of bread ten days old, and wafer-biscuits, upon which 
we scantily supped, and then, folding around us such drapery 
and wraps as we had, lay down to sleep upon the couches 
which the conductor ingeniously arranged for us, by some 
skillful adjustment of the car-seats. In the morning, after due 
ablutions made at the tank of the locomotive, we were hospitably 
welcomed by the agent, General Dickison, and his 
son, to a much -needed share of their breakfast in the stationary 
box-car, which served both as bedroom, parlor, and 
dining-room. 
To our great delight we found that General Dickison knew 
the tree which I was in search of ; and it was arranged that 
bis son should conduct me to the locality, not far distant. So 
striking an evergreen tree could not fail of notice. The people 
of the district knew it by the name of " Stinking Cedar " or 
" Savine " — the unsavory adjective referring to a peculiar 
unpleasant smell which the wounded bark exhales. The timber 
is valued for fence-posts and the like, and is said to be 
as durable as red cedar. I may add that, in consequence of 
the stir we made about it, the people are learning to call it 
Torreya. They are proud of having a tree which, as they 
have rightly been told, grows nowhere else in the world. 
My desire for a sight of it was soon gratified. Making our 
way into the woods north of the railroad track, along the 
ridges covered with a mixed growth of Pines and deciduous 
trees, I soon discerned a thrifty young Torreya, and afterwards 
several of larger size, some of them with male flowers 
just developed. 
As we approached the first one, I told my companion that 
I expected to find under its shade a peculiar low herb, which 
I described, but had never yet seen growing wild. And there, 
indeed, it was, — greatly to the wonderment of my companion 
— the botanically curious little Croomia pauciflora, just as it 
was found by Mr. Croom, when he also discovered the tree, 
nearly forty years ago, probably at a station several miles 
farther south. I was a pupil and assistant of the lamented 
Torrey when Mr. Croom brought to him specimens, both of 
the tree and of the berb, both new genera. The former, as I 
have stated, was named for Dr. Torrey by his correspondent 
Arnott. The latter was dedicated to its discoverer by Dr. 
Torrey. I well remember Mr. Croom's remark upon the occasion, 
that if his name was deemed worthy of botanical 
honors, it was gratifying to him, and becoming to the circumstances, 
that it should be borne by the unpretending herb 
which delighted to shelter itself under the noble Torreya. It 
is not, as Mr. Croom then supposed, exclusively so found ; 
for it grows also in the central and upper portions of Alabama 
and Georgia, where Torreya is unknown, but where I fancy 
it may once have flourished. I cannot here detail the reasons 
for this supposition. 
There is a second Torreya in Japan, founded on Thunberg's 
Taxus nucifera, of which I saw original specimens at the 
British Museum, in the winter of 1838-9, and then identified 
the genus. There is likewise in Japan a second Croomia, 
very probably in company with the Torreya. A third Torreya 
inhabits California, but it has no associate Croomia. 
I have formerly treated of the peculiar distribution of these 
genera and species between the United States and Japan, 
have collocated a large number of equally striking similar 
instances, and have offered certain speculations in explanation 
of them. The views maintained have been more and more 
confirmed, and are now adopted by the leading philosophical 
botanists. 
The few hours devoted to this first search for Torreya, 
pleasant as they were, yet were too scantily rewarded to 
satiate my interest. I saw no tree with trunk over six inches 
in diameter, and found no female blossoms. It was necessary 
to hasten back to the railway car, to await the expected summons 
to the steamboat. I bore with me, besides my botanical 
specimens, a stick of Torreya, suitable for a staff, which 
I propose to make over to the President of the Torrey Botanical 
Club, for the official baton. Before long the whistle of 
the steamboat announced its approach to the landing, and 
offered us a prospect of a much-needed dinner ; the water 
had fallen sufficiently to allow us to be conveyed to the wharf 
upon a hand-car, and so we embarked for Apalachicola via 
Bainbridge. That is, we went up the Flint River about forty 
miles and thence back in the night, past the place of embarkation. 

I will not here give any account of a delightful ten days' 
episode, beginning with the voyage down the brimming river, 
bordered with almost unbroken green of every tint, from the 
dark background of Long-leaved Pines to the tender new 
verdure of the Liquidambar and other deciduous trees in their 
freshest development, interspersed with the deep and lustrous 
hue of Magnolia grandiflora, and, when the banks were low, 
dominated by weird, naked trunks of Southern Cypress (Taxodium), 
their branches hung with long tufts and streamers of 
the gray and sombre Southern Moss (Tillandsia) below, while 
above they were just putting forth their delicate foliage. 
Along the lower part of the river, occasional Palmettoes gave 
a still more tropical aspect. Then followed a week and more 
at dead and dilapidated, but still charming, Apalachicola, 
where the post-office opens on Monday evenings, when the 
steamboat arrives, and closes for a week the next morning, 
when she departs, — where the climate, thanks to the embrac-. 
ing Gulf, is as delicious in summer as it is bland in winter ; 
where game, the best of fish, and the most luscious oysters are 
to be had almost for nothing, and blackberries come early in 
April when the oranges are gone ; and where, far from the 
crowd and bustle of the world, with Bill Fuller for caterer, 
and his wife Adeline for cook, the choicest fare is to be enjoyed 
at the cheapest rate. Then there was the pleasure of 
renewing our acquaintance with Dr. Chapman, and botanizing 
with him over some of the ground which he has explored so 
long and so well, of gathering, under his guidance, the stately 
Sarracenia Drummondii in its native habitat, and, not least, 
acquiring from him fuller information respecting the localities 
where Torreya grows. 
The return voyage up the river was not less enjoyable 
than the descent. It was so timed that the bold bluff of Aspalaga, 
where the tree was first found, was reached after sunrise. 
But it was sad to see that the Torreya trees, which 
overhung the river here in former days, had been cut away, 
perhaps for steamboat fuel. So I did not land ; but leaving 
the boat a few miles above, at the upper Chattahoochee landing, 
while it made the run to Bainbridge and back, I had a 
long day to devote to Torreya. Following Dr. Chapman's 
directions, I repaired to the wooded bluff to the north of the 
road, where I soon found an abundance of the trees, of various 
ages, interspersed among other growth. The largest tree 
I saw grew near the bottom of a deep ravine ; its trunk just 
above the base measured almost four feet in circumference, 
and was proportionally tall. But it was dominated by the 
noblest Magnolia grandiflora I ever set eyes on, with trunk 
seven and a half feet in girth. 
After long search one tree was found with female flowers, 
or rather with forming fruit, from which a few specimens 
were gathered. Seedlings and young trees are not uncommon, 
and some old stumps were sprouting from the base, in 
the manner of the Californian Redwood. So this species 
may be expected to endure, unless these bluffs should be 
wantonly disforested — against which their distance from the 
river and the steepness of the ground offer some protection. 
But any species of very restricted range may be said to hold 
its existence by a precarious tenure. The known range of 
this species is not more than a dozen miles in length along 
these bluffs, although Dr. Chapman has heard of its growing 
further south, where the bluff trends away from the river. 
At least the Yew-tree grows there, which Mr. Croom found 
with the Torreya near Aspalaga, and I heard of it (identifying 
it by the description) as growing five or six miles away. 
Returning to the boat at nightfall, I brought with me thirty 
or forty seedling Torreyas, which, being too far advanced to 
be safely sent far north this spring, have been successfully 
consigned to the excellent Mr. Berckman's care, at Augusta, 
Georgia. I hope that one or more of them may in due time 
be planted upon the grave of Torrey. 
A word or two of Mr. Croom and his sad fate. His name 
merely is known to botanists as the discoverer of Torreya 
taxifolia and of Croomia pauciflora, and as the author of a 
monograph of Sarracenia, in which the handsomest species, 
S. Drummondii, was originally described and figured. He 
was the first, after Chapman in 1836, to find this in blossom, 
Drummond having seen and collected the leaves only, in a 
winter visit to Apalachicola. Of the botanists who remember 
and personally knew him, only Dr. Chapman and myself 
survive. Mr. Croom, originally, I believe, of Newbern, 
Lenoir County, North Carolina, had a plantation at Quincy, 
Florida, and another at Mariana, opposite Aspalaga ; and it 
was in passing from one to the other that he discovered the 
tree of which I have been discoursing, as well as the herbaceous 
plant which bears his name. He was an accomplished 
and most amiable young man, full of enterprise and zeal for 
botany, and much was expected from him. But, just as he 
was entering upon his chosen field, and had made prepara- 
tions for a thorough exploration of Florida, in connection 
with his friend Dr. Chapman, he was lost at sea, with his 
wife and all his children, in the foundering of the ill-fated 
" Home," between New York and Charleston. 
I have been told that two seedling Torreyas which Mr. 
Croom planted near his house at Quincy, and which had 
become stately trees, have recently been demolished by the 
present proprietor ; also that a tree of Mr. Groom's planting 
still flourishes in the grounds of the state-house at Tallahassee. 

NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF HELIANTHUS TUBEROSUS, 
THE SO-CALLED JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE. 
Under this heading the botanical editor of the Journal 1 
proposes to offer a few explanatory remarks, introductory to 
the subjoined letter which he received from Mr. Trumbull in 
answer to a recent inquiry. 
Linnaeus, in the " Species Plantarum," gave to PPelianthus 
tuberosus the " habitat in Brasilia." In his earlier " Hortus 
Cliffortianus " the habitat assigned was " Canada." M. Alphonse 
De Candolle, in his " Geographie Botanique," ii. 824 
(1855), refers to this as " decidedly an error, at least as to 
Canada properly so called," assigns good reasons for the opinion 
that it did not come from Brazil, nor from Peru (to which 
the name under which it appeared in cultivation in the Farnese 
garden seemed to refer), but in all probability from 
Mexico or the United States. He adds that Humboldt did 
not meet with it in any of the Spanish colonies. 
About this time I received from my friend and correspondent, 
the late Dr. Short of Kentucky, some long and narrow 
tubers of Helianthus doronicoides, Lam., with the statement 
that he and some of his neighbors found them good food for 
hogs, and, if I rightly remember, had planted them for that 
purpose. They were planted here in the Botanic Garden ; 
after two or three years it was found that some of the tubers 
produced were thicker and shorter ; some of these were cooked 
along with Jerusalem artichokes, and found to resemble them 
in flavor, although coarser. Consequently, in the second 
edition of my " Manual of the Botany of the Northern United 
States " (1856), it is stated that PP. doronicoides is most 
probably the original of PP. tuberosus. This opinion was 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xiii. 347. (1877.) 
strengthened year after year by the behavior of the tubers, 
and by the close similarity, of the herbage and flowers of the 
two plants, as they grew side by side ; indeed, as the two 
patches were allowed to ran together in a waste or neglected 
place, they have become in a measure confounded. Wishing 
to obtain an unmixed stock, I applied last autumn to Professor 
J. M. Coulter of Hanover, Indiana, and received from 
him a good number of tubers from wild plants of the neighborhood, 
which will now be grown. Some of these were slender, 
some thicker and shorter, and a few were to all appearance 
identical with Jerusalem artichokes. If they were really all 
from one stock, as there is reason to believe, the question of 
the origin of EPelianthus tuberosus is wellnigh settled. 
We were now interested to know whether our Indians, at 
least those of the Mississippi Valley, where //. doronicoides 
belongs, were known to cultivate these tubers or to use them 
for food. Recently a note in the " American Agriculturist " 
called attention to a sentence in Dr. Palfrey's " History of 
New England," i. 27, stating that the Indians of that region 
raised, among other articles of food, " a species of Sunflower, 
whose esculent tuberous root resembled the artichoke in taste." 
The venerable historian found himself at the moment unable 
to refer me to the sources of this statement ; but as it was 
now certain that some record of the kind existed, 1 applied 
to Mr. Trumbull, who obligingly and promptly supplied the 
information required, and placed it at my disposal in the following 
letter. 
Hartford, Conn., March 26, 1877. 
My dear Professor Gray: I cannot refer you to the 
authority (totidem verbis) for Dr. Palfrey's statement that 
the Indians of New England cultivated " a species of Sunflower, 
whose esculent tuberous root resembled the artichoke 
in taste," but there can be, I think, little doubt of the fact. 
The historical evidence that "artischoki sub terra" were cultivated 
in Canada and in some parts of New England before 
the coming of Europeans is tolerably clear. The only question, 
if there be any, is as to species ; and this does not appear 
to have been raised for more than half a century after the 
" Jerusalem artichoke " was known to English and Continental 
botanists. 
I can discover no authority whatever, before 1700, for 
ascribing to the Helianthus tuberosus, either a Brazilian or 
a Mexican origin, except — and the exception is unimportant 
— in C. Bauhin's identification (in his Pinax, 277) witlXHelianthemum 
Indicum tuberosum" (//. tuberosus, L.), of a 
plant that he had described in his earlier "Prodromus" (ed. 
1671 p 70) as " Chrysanthemon latifolium Brasihanum," 
from' a dried specimen sent to him "eo nomine " from the 
garden of Contarini. . .  
The first trace I find of this species, in Europe, is m the 
°d part (cap 6) of Fabio Colonna's " Ecphrasis minus cognitarum 
stirpium," published at Rome in 1616. He described 
it from a plant growing in the garden of Cardinal Farnese. 
The Sunflower was already well known to European botanists, 
and had been described and figured by Dodoens (1563) and 
Lobel (1576) as Chrysanthemum Peruvianum and Bios 
solis Perumanus. With reference to these descriptions, 
probably, Colonna gave the new species the name of Aster 
Peruanus,tuberosa radice, otherwise Solis flos Farnesianus. 
(He o-ave a more particular description of the plant m his 
annotations to Recchi's Hernandez, "Plant. Mexic Hist 
1651, pp. 878, 881, as Peruanus Solis flos ex Pndvis tube- 
rosus.) 
The author of the " Descriptio variorum plantarum, m 
Horto Farnesiano," published under the name of Tobias Aldinus 
(Rome, 1625), gave some account of the roots, which 
he calls "Tubera Indica," of the Solis flos tuberosus, sen 
Flos Farnesianus Fabii Columnm (p. 91). It may be observed 
that several of the rarer plants in the Farnese garden, 
at this time, were from "Canada" and "Virginia. The 
Passion Flower (admirably figured by Aldmus) is described 
under its Virginian name, " Maracot " (the " Maracocks of 
John Smith and Strachey) ; and a Campanula Americana is 
otherwise named " Campanula Virginiana, seu ex Virgimis 
1/71 S?V 1 1 *? 
C. Bauhin, in bis "Pinax" (first published in 1623), ed. 
1671, p. 276, notes that the " PPelianthemum Pndicum tuberosum 
" is called " Chrysanthemum e Canada, quibusdam. 
Canada et Artischoki sub terra, aliis. Gigantea, Burgundis." 
P. Laurenberg, " Apparat. plant." (Rostock, 1632), names 
the species " Adenes Canadenses or Flos Solis glandulosus." 
Ant. Vallot, " Hortus Regis, Paris," 1665 (as cited by Bauhin), 
gives the names " Canada and Artischoki sub terra," and 
" Canadas," and describes also " Plelenium Canadense altissimum, 
Vosacan dictum," which Tournefort distinguishes as 
" Corona Solis rapunculi radice " (Inst. Herb. 490), and which 
became IP. strumosus, L. "Vosacan," by the way, is a French 
fashion of writing the Algonkin word " wassakone " or " wassakwan," 
which means a " bright yellow flower." The modern 
Chippeways give this name to the flowers of the Pumpkin 
and Squash. 
Under whatever name the Jerusalem Artichoke was described, 
there seems to have been a general agreement among 
European botanists that it came from Canada. F. Schuyl, 
"CataJ. Horti Lugd. Bat." (Heidelberg, 1672), varies the 
specific name to " Chrysanthemum Canadense Arum.osum.'" 
P. Amman, " Charac. Plant. Nat." (1676), has " PPelenium 
Canadense." 
It was introduced to England about 1617. In that year, 
Mr. John Goodyer, of Maple Durham, Hampshire, " received 
two small roots thereof, from Mr. Franquevill of London," 
which were planted, and enabled him, before 1621, to " store 
Hampshire." He wrote an account of the plant, under date 
of October 17, 1621, for T. Johnson, — who printed it in his 
edition of Gerard, 1636 (p. 753). Before this the species 
had been figured and described by J. Parkinson, in " Paradisus 
Terrestris" (London, 1629), as " Battatas de Canada," 
and in his " Theatre of Plants," 1640 (p. 1383), he has the 
figure — a good one — without the description, under the names 
" Battatas de Canada, the French Battatas, or Hierusalem 
Artichoke." Johnson, in Gerard (p. 753), refers to Parkinson's 
description, and gives the name as "Flos Solis Pyramidalis, 
Jerusalem Artichoke." It already grew " well and 
plentifully in many parts of England." 
The notices by early voyagers, of ground-nuts, eaten by the 
Indians, are generally so brief and so vague, that it is not 
easy to distinguish the three or four species mentioned under 
that name or its equivalents. The Solarium tuberosum, 
Apios tuberosa, Aralia trifolia, and a Cyperus (articulatus ?) 
were all " ground-nuts," or " earth-nuts." We find, however, 
in a few instances, unmistakable mention of the roots already 
known in Europe as " Canadian." 
Brereton, in his account of Gosnold's voyage to New England 
in 1602, notes the "great store of ground-nuts" found 
on all the Elizabeth Islands. They grow " forty together on 
a string, some of them as big as a hen's egg " (Purchas, iv. 
1651). These, doubtless, were the roots of Apios tuberosa. 
But when Champlain, a few years later (1605-6), was in the 
same re°-ion, he observed that the Almouchiquois Indians near 
Point Mallebarre (Nauset harbor, probably,) had " force des 
racines qu'els cultivent, lesquelles ont le gout d'artichaut " 
(Voyages, ed. 1632, p. 84). And it is to these roots, evidently, 
that Lescarbot alludes, " Histoire de la Nouv. France," 
1612 (p. 840) : there is, he says, in the country of the Armouchiquois 
(i. e., New England, west and south of Maine), 
a certain kind of roots " grosses comme naveaux, tres excellentes 
a manger, ayans un gout retirant aux carcles, mais plus 
agreable, lesquelles plantees multiplient en telle facon que 
c'est merveille ; " and he thinks these must be the "Afrodilles 
" described by Pliny. 
Sagard-Theodat (Hist, du Canada, 1636, p. 785) mentions 
the cultivation of the Sunflower by the Hurons — who extracted 
oil from its seeds, — and names also the " roots that 
we [the French] call Canadiennes or Pommes de Canada, 
and that the Hurons call ' Orasqueinta,' which are not very 
(assez pen) common in their country. They eat them raw, 
as well as cooked, as they eat another sort of root resembling 
parsnips [Sium lineare ?], which they call Sondhratates, and 
which are much better ; but they seldom gave us these, and 
only when they received some present from us or when we 
visited them in their cabins." He goes on to speak of " patates, 
fort grosses et tres-excellentes," some of which he had 
obtained from an English vessel captured by the French ; but 
none of these were to be found in the Huron country, nor 
could the Indians tell him the name of them ; and he regretted 
that he had not brought some with him, for planting, since 
" this root, being cut in pieces and planted, quickly grows 
and multiplies, it is said, like the pommes de Canada " (pp. 
781, 782). It is plain that the Huron roots first mentioned 
were, or that Sagard believed them to be, " Jerusalem Artichokes," 
— already known as " Canadian." 
I find no mention of the artichoke in Virginia or the 
southern colonies before it was cultivated by Anglo-Americans. 
The author of " A Perfect Description of Virginia," 
printed in 1649, says that the English planters have (inter 
alia) " roots of several kindes, Potatoes, Sparagus, Garrets, 
. . . and Hartichokes." Beverly (Hist, of Virginia, 1722, 
p. 254) mentions " Batatas Canadensis, or Jerusalem Artichoke," 
as planted by some of the English, for brewing beer. 
Yet, the name of one of the esculent roots mentioned by Hariot 
(Brief and True Report, etc., 1585) ought to belong to 
some species of Sun Flower — and if to any, to H. tuberosus. 
Hariot names three tuberous roots found in Virginia : 
" Openauk, a kind of roots of round form, some of the bignes 
of walnuts, some far greater, which are found in moist and 
marish grounds growing many together one by another in 
ropes, or as though they were fastened with a string. Being 
boiled or sodden, they are very good meate." [C. Bauhin 
(Prodromus, 89) identifies these with Solanum tuberosum 
esculenturn, — and has been followed by later writers. The 
description seems to me to indicate Apios tuberosa.^ " Kaishucpenauk, 
a white kind of roots about the bignes of hen egs 
and nere of that forme : their taste was not so good to our 
seeming as of the other, and therefore their place and manner 
of growing not so much cared for by vs : the inhabitants 
notwithstanding vsed to boile and eat many." These may 
be " Virginia potatoes," but their name, if Hariot recorded it 
correctly, means " Sun-tubers." The etymology is perfectly 
clear. The other roots described by Hariot, " Okeepenauk 
are also of round shape, found in dry grounds : some are of 
the bignes of a man's head," etc. These must be the " Tubera 
terrae maxima," of Clayton, " vulgo Tuckahoo," which Gronovius 
(Fl. Virgin. 205) refers to Lycoperdon solidum, L., 
and for which Rafinesque (Med. Fl. ii. 270) proposed a new 
genus Tucahus. Kalm describes them (Travels, i. 225) as 
"Truffles." Fries (El. Fung. ii. 39) assigns them to his 
Pachyma cocos. 
Writing in haste and with frequent interruptions, it has 
been possible to do little more than copy, without condensing 
or arranging, such notes as I had before me. They have extended 
to such a length that I must not add even an apology 
for the superfluous matter. Yours truly, 
J. H. Trumbull. 
It would be interesting to know whence came the French 
name of these Helianthus tubers, " Topinambour," it being 
the only thing in the case which, as Mr. Trumbull remarks, 
" looks to a Brazilian origin, as it seems to be derived (and 
so Littre gives it) from the Topinamboux Indians of Brazil." 
The English name, " Jerusalem Artichoke," conies, as is well 
known, from the Italian " Girasola," i. e. Sunflower. 
As to the annual Sunflower, or Helianthus annuus, said by 
Linnaeus to come from Peru and Mexico, I have for some 
years been convinced that its original is the PP. lenticularis 
of Douglas, which again is probably only a larger form of //. 
petiolaris of Nuttall, natives of the western part of the Mississippi 
Valley and of the plains to and beyond the Rocky 
Mountains. It is an interesting confirmation of this opinion 
that Sagard (as mentioned in the above communication) and 
Champfain found this Sunflower in cultivation by the Huron 
Indians, for the sake of the oil of its seeds, which they used 
for hair-oil. 
FOREST GEOGRAPHY AND ARCHÆOLOGY. 
It is the forests of the Northern temperate zone which we 
are to traverse. After taking some note of them in their 
present condition and relations, we may inquire into their 
pedigree ; and, from a consideration of what and where the 
component trees have been in days of old, derive some probable 
explanation of peculiarities which otherwise seem inexplicable 
and strange. 
In speaking of our forests in their present condition, I 
mean not exactly as they are to-day, but as they were before 
civilized man had materially interfered with them. In the 
district we inhabit such interference is so recent that we have 
little difficulty in conceiving the conditions which here prevailed, 
a few generations ago, when the "forest primeval" — 
described in the first lines of a familiar poem — covered 
essentially the whole country, from the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
and Canada to Florida and Texas, from the Atlantic to beyond 
the Mississippi. This, our Atlantic forest, is one of the 
largest and almost the richest of the temperate forests of the 
world. That is, it comprises a greater diversity of species 
than any other, except one. 
In crossing the country from the Atlantic westward, we 
leave this forest behind us when we pass the western borders 
of those organized States which lie along the right bank of 
the Mississippi. We exchange it for prairies and open plains, 
wooded only along the watercourses, — plains which grow 
more and more bare and less green as we proceed westward, 
with only some scattering Cottonwoods (i. e. Poplars) on the 
immediate banks of the traversing rivers, which are themselves 
far between. 
1 A lecture delivered before the Harvard University Natural History 
Society, April 18, 1878. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., 
xvi. 85, 183.) <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:52:06 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

ranges. Through most of California these two Pacific forests 
are separate ; in the northern part of that State they join, 
and form one rich woodland belt, skirting the Pacific, backed 
by the Cascade Mountains, and extending through British 
Columbia into our Alaskan territory. 
So we have two forest regions in North America, — an Atlantic 
and a Pacific. They may take these names, for they 
are dependent upon the oceans which they respectively border. 
Also we have an intermediate isolated region or isolated 
lines of forest, flanked on both sides by bare and arid plains, 
— plains which on the eastern side may partly be called 
prairies, on the western, deserts. 
This mid-region mountain forest is intersected by a transverse 
belt of arid and alkaline plateau, or eastward of grassy 
plain — a hundred miles wide from north to south, ■ — through 
which passes the Union Pacific Railroad. This divides the 
Rocky Mountain forest into a southern and a northern portion. 
The southern is completely isolated. The northern, in 
a cooler and less arid region, is larger, broader, more diffused. 
Trending westward, on and beyond the northern 
boundary of the United States, it approaches, and here and 
there unites with, the Pacific forest. Eastward, in northern 
British territory, it makes a narrow junction with northwestward 
prolongations of the broad Atlantic forest. 
So much for these forests as a whole, their position, their 
limits. Before we glance at their distinguishing features and 
component trees, I should here answer the question, why 
they occupy the positions they do ; — why so curtailed and 
separated at the south, so much more diffused at the north, 
but still so strongly divided into eastern and western. Yet I 
must not consume time with the rudiments of physical geography 
and meteorology. It goes without saying that trees 
are nourished by moisture. They starve with dryness and 
they starve with cold. A tree is a sensitive thing. With its 
great spread of foliage, its vast amount of surface which it 
cannot diminish or change, except by losing that whereby it 
lives, it is completely and helplessly exposed to every atmospheric 
change ; or at least its resources for adaptation are 
very limited ; and it cannot flee for shelter. But trees are 
social, and their gregarious habits give a certain mutual support. 
A tree by itself is doomed, where a forest, once established, 
is comparatively secure. 
Trees vary as widely as do other plants in their constitution 
; but none can withstand a certain amount of cold and 
other exposure, nor make head against a certain shortness of 
summer. Our high northern regions are therefore treeless ; 
and so are the summits of high mountains in lower latitudes. 
As we ascend them we walk at first under Spruces and Firtrees 
or Birches ; at 6000 feet on the White Mountains of 
New Hampshire, at 11,000 or 12,000 feet on the Colorado 
Rocky Mountains, we walk through or upon them ; sometimes 
upon dwarfed and depressed individuals of the same species 
that made the canopy below. These depressed trees retain 
their hold on life only in virtue of being covered all winter 
by snow. At still higher altitudes the species are wholly different 
; and for the most part these humble alpine plants of 
our temperate zone — which we cannot call trees, because 
they are only a foot or two or a span or two high — are the 
same as those of the arctic zone, of northern Labrador, and of 
Greenland. The arctic and the alpine regions are equally 
unwooded from cold. 
As the opposite extreme, under opposite conditions, look to 
equatorial America, on the Atlantic side, for the wildest and 
most luxuriant forest-tract in the world, where winter is unknown, 
and a shower of rain falls almost every afternoon. 
The size of the Amazon and Orinoco — brimming throughout 
the year — testifies to the abundance of rain and its equable 
distribution. 
The other side of the Andes, mostly farther south, shows 
the absolute contrast, in the want of rain, and absence of forest 
; happily it is a narrow tract. The same is true of great 
tracts either side of the equatorial regions, the only district 
where great deserts reach the ocean. 
It is also true of great continental interiors out of the 
equatorial belt, except where cloud-compelling mountainchains 
coerce a certain deposition of moisture from air which 
could give none to the heated plains below. So the broad interior 
of our country is forestless from dryness in our latitude, 
as the high northern zone is forestless from cold. 
Regions with distributed rain are naturally forest-clad. 
Regions with scanty rain, and at one season, are forestless or 
sparsely wooded, except they have some favoring compensations. 
Rainless regions are desert. 
The Atlantic United States in the zone of variable weather 
and distributed rains, and the Gulf of Mexico as a caldron 
for brewing rain, and no continental expanse between that 
great caldron and the Pacific, crossed by a prevalent southwest 
wind in summer, is greatly favored for summer as well 
as winter rain. 
And so this forest region of ours, with an annual rainfall 
of fifty inches on the lower Mississippi, fifty-two inches in all 
the country east of it bordering the Gulf of Mexico, fortyfive 
to forty-one in all the proper Atlantic district from east 
Florida to Maine and the whole region drained by the Ohio, 
— diminished only to thirty-four inches on the whole upper 
Mississippi and Great Lake region, — with this amount of 
rain, fairly distributed over the year, and the greater part not 
in the winter, our forest is well accounted for. 
The narrow district occupied by the Pacific forest has a 
much more unequal rainfall, — more unequal in its different 
parts, most unequal in the different seasons of the year, very 
different in the same place in different years. 
From the Gulf of Mexico to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the 
amount of rain decreases moderately and rather regularly 
from south to north ; but, as less is needed in a cold climate, 
there is enough to nourish forest throughout. On the Pacific 
coast, from the Gulf of California to Puget Sound, the southerly 
third has almost no rain at all ; the middle portion has 
less than our Atlantic least ; the northern third has about our 
Atlantic average. 
Then, New England has about the same amount of rainfall 
in winter and in summer; Florida and Alabama about one 
half more in the three summer than in the three winter 
months, — a fairly equable distribution. But on the Pacific 
coast there is no summer rain at all, except in the northern 
portion, and there little. And the winter rain, of forty-four 
inches on the northern border, diminishes to less than one 
half before reaching the Bay of San Francisco ; dwindles to 
twelve, ten, and eight inches on the southern coast, and to 
four inches before we reach the United States boundary below 
San Diego. 
Taking the whole year together, and confining ourselves 
to the coast, the average rainfall for the year, from Puget 
Sound to the border of California, is from eighty inches at 
the north to seventy at the south, i. e., seventy on the 
northern edge of California ; thence it diminishes rapidly to 
thirty-six, twenty (about San Francisco), twelve, and at San 
Die^o to eisfht inches. 
The two rainiest regions of the United States are the Pacific 
coast north of latitude forty-five, and the northeastern 
coast and borders of the Gulf of Mexico. But when one is 
rainy the other is comparatively rainless. For while this Pacific 
rainy region has only from twelve to two inches of its 
rain in the summer months, Florida, out of its forty to sixty, 
has twenty to twenty-six in summer, and only six to ten in the 
winter months. 
Again, the diminution of rainfall, as we proceed inland 
from the Atlantic and Gulf shores, is gradual ; the expanse 
that is or was forest-clad is very broad, and we wonder only 
that it did not extend farther west than it does. 
On the other side of the continent, at the north, the district 
so favored with winter rain is but a narrow strip, between the 
ocean and the Cascade Mountains. East of the latter, the 
amount abruptly declines, — for the year, from eighty inches 
to sixteen ; for the winter months, from forty-four and forty 
to eight and four inches ; for the summer months, from 
twelve and four to two and one. 
So we can understand why the Cascade Mountains abruptly 
separate dense and tall forest on the west from treelessness 
on the east. We may conjecture, also, why this north Pacific 
forest is so magnificent in its development. 
Equally, in the rapid decrease of rainfall southward, in its 
corresponding restriction to one season, in the continuation of 
the Cascade Mountains as the Sierra Nevada, cutting off access 
of rain to the interior, in the unbroken stretch of coast 
ranges near the sea, and the consequent small and precarious 
rainfall in the great interior valley of California, we see 
reasons why the Californian forest is mainly attenuated southward 
into two lines, — into two files of a narrow but lordly 
procession, advancing southward along the coast ranges, and 
along the western flank of the Sierra Nevada, leaving the 
lon°- valley between comparatively bare of trees. 
By the limited and precarious rainfall of California we 
may account for the limitations of its forest. But how shall 
we account for the fact that this district of comparatively little 
rain produces the largest trees in the world — not only produces, 
alone of all the world, those two peculiar Big Trees 
which excite our special wonder, — their extraordinary growth 
might be some idiosyncrasy of a race, — but also produces 
Pines and Fir-trees whose brethren we know, and whose 
capabilities we can estimate, upon a scale only less gigantic ? 
Evidently there is something here wonderfully favorable to 
the development of trees, especially of coniferous trees ; and 
it is not easy to determine what it can be. 
Nor, indeed, does the rainfall of the coast of Oregon, 
great as it is, fully account for the extraordinary development 
of its forest ; for the rain is nearly all in winter, very little 
in summer. Yet here is more timber to the acre than in 
any other part of North America, or perhaps in any other 
part of the world. The trees are never so enormous in girth 
as some of the Californian, but are of equal height, at least 
on the average, three hundred feet being common, and they 
stand almost within arms' length of each other. 
The explanation of all this may mainly be found in the 
great climatic differences between the Pacific and the Atlantic 
sides of the continent ; and the explanation of these differ- 
ences is found in the difference in the winds and the great 
ocean currents. 
The winds are from the ocean to the land all the year 
round, from northwesterly in summer, southwesterly in win- 
ter. And the great Pacific Gulf-stream sweeps toward and 
along the coast, instead of bearing away from it, as on our 
Atlantic side. 
The winters are mild and short, and are to a great extent a 
season of growth, instead of suspension of growth as with us. 
So there is a far longer season available to tree vegetation 
than with us, during all of which trees may either grow or 
accumulate the materials for growth. On our side of the 
continent and in this latitude, trees use the whole autumn in 
getting ready for a six-months winter, which is completely 
lost time. 
Finally, as concerns the west coast, the lack of summer rain 
is made up by the moisture-laden ocean winds, which regularly 
every summer afternoon wrap the coast-ranges of mountains, 
which these forests affect, with mist and fog. The Redwood, 
one of the two California Big Trees, — the handsomest and 
far the most abundant and useful, — is restricted to these 
coast ranges, bathed with soft showers fresh from the ocean 
all winter, and with fogs and moist ocean air all summer. It 
is nowhere found beyond the reach of these fogs. South of 
Monterey, where this summer condensation lessens, and winter 
rains become precarious, the Redwoods disappear, and the general 
forest becomes restricted to favorable stations on mountain 
sides and summits. . . . The whole coast is bordered by 
a line of mountains, which condense the moisture of the seabreezes 
upon their cool slopes and summits. These winds, 
continuing eastward, descend dry into the valleys, and warming 
as they descend, take up moisture instead of dropping 
any. These valleys, when broad, are sparsely wooded or woodless, 
except at the north, where summer rain is not very rare. 
Beyond stretches the Sierra Nevada, all rainless in summer, 
except local hail-storms and snowfalls on its higher crests and 
peaks. Yet its flanks are forest-clad; and, between the levels 
of 3000 and 9000 feet, they bear an ample growth of the largest 
coniferous trees known. In favored spots of this forest, 
and only there, are found those groves of the giant Sequoia, 
near kin of the Redwood of the coast ranges, whose trunks are 
trom fifty to ninety feet in circumference, and whose height is 
from two hundred to three hundred and twenty-five feet. And 
in reaching these wondrous trees you ride through miles of 
Sugar Pines, Yellow Pines, Spruces, and Firs, of such magnificence 
in girth and height, that the Big Trees, when reached 
— astonishing as they are — seem not out of keeping with 
their surroundings. 
I cannot pretend to account for the extreme magnificence of 
this Sierra forest. Its rainfall is in winter, and of unknown 
but large amount. Doubtless most of it is in snow, of which 
fifty or sixty feet fall in some winters, and — different from 
the coast and from Oregon, where it falls as rain, and at a 
temperature which does not suspend vegetable action — here 
the winter must be complete cessation. But with such great 
snowfall the supply of moisture to the soil should be abundant 
and lasting. 
Then the Sierra — much loftier than the coast ranges, rising 
from 7000 or 8000 to 11,000 and 14,000 feet — is refreshed 
in summer by the winds from the Pacific, from which it takes 
the last drops of available moisture ; and mountains of such 
altitude, to which moisture from whatever source or direction 
must necessarily be attracted, are always expected to support 
forests, — at least when not cut off from sea-winds by interposed 
chains of equal altitude. Trees such mountains will have. The 
only and the real wonder is, that the Sierra Nevada should rear 
such immense trees ! 
Moreover, we shall see that this forest is rich and superb 
only in one line ; that, beyond one favorite tribe, it is meagre 
enough. Such for situation, and extent, and surrounding conditions, 
are the two forests — the Atlantic and Pacific — ■ which 
are to be compared. 
In order to come to this comparison, I must refrain from all 
account of the intervening forest of the Rocky Mountains — 
only saying that it is comparatively poor in the size of its 
trees and the number of species ; that few of its species are 
peculiar, and those mostly in the southern part, and of the 
Mexican plateau type ; that they are common to the mountain 
chains which lie between, stretched north and south en echelon, 
all through that arid or desert region of Utah and Nevada, of 
FOREST GEOGRAPHY AND ARCHAEOLOGY. 213 
which the larger part belongs to the great basin between the 
Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada ; that most of the 
Rocky Mountain trees are identical in species with those of the 
Pacific forest, except far north, where a few of our eastern 
ones are intermingled. I may add that the Rocky Mountains 
proper get from twelve to twenty inches of rain in the year, 
mostly in winter snow, some in summer showers. 
But the interior mountains get little, and the plains or valleys 
between them less ; the Sierra arresting nearly all the 
moisture coming from the Pacific, the Rocky Mountains all 
coming: from the Atlantic side. 
Forests being my subject, I must not tarry on the woodless 
plain on an average 500 miles wide — which lies between 
what forest there is in the Rocky Mountains and the western 
border of our eastern wooded region. Why this great sloping 
plain should be woodless — except where some Cottonwoods 
and their like mark the course of the traversing rivers — is, 
on the whole, evident enough. Great interior plains in temperate 
latitudes are always woodless, even when not very arid. 
This of ours is not arid to the degree that the corresponding 
regions west of the Rocky Mountains are. The moisture from 
the Pacific which those could otherwise share is — as we have 
seen — arrested on or near the western border by the coastranges 
and again by the Sierra Nevada ; and so the interior 
(except for the mountains) is all but desert. 
On the eastern side of the continent, the moisture supplied 
by the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico meets no such obstruction. 
So the diminution of rainfall is gradual instead of 
abrupt. But this moisture is spread over a vast surface, and it 
is naturally bestowed, first and most on the seaboard district, 
and least on the remote interior. From the lower Mississippi 
eastward and northward, including the Ohio River basin, and 
so to the coast, and up to Nova Scotia, there is an average 
of forty-seven inches of rain in the year. This diminishes 
rather steadily westward, especially northwestward, and the 
western border of the ultra-Mississippian plain gets less than 
twenty inches. 
Indeed, from the great prevalence of westerly and southerly 
winds, what precipitation of moisture there is on our western 
plains is not from Atlantic sources, nor much from the Gulf. 
The rain-chart plainly shows that the water raised from the 
heated Gulf is mainly carried northward and eastward. It is 
this which has given us the Atlantic forest-region ; and it is the 
limitation of this which bounds that forest at the west. The 
line on the rain-chart indicating twenty-four inches of annual 
rain is not far from the line of the western limit of trees, except 
far north, beyond the Great Lakes, where, in the coolness 
of high latitudes, as in the coolness of mountains, a less 
amount of rainfall suffices for forest-growth. 
We see, then, why our great plains grow bare as we proceed 
from the Mississippi westward ; though we wonder why this 
should take place so soon and so abruptly as it does. But, as 
already stated, the general course of the wind-bearing rains 
from the Gulf and beyond is such as to water well the Mississippi 
Valley and all eastward, but not the district west 
of it. 
It does not altogether follow that, because rain or its equivalent 
is needed for forest, therefore wherever there is rain 
enough, forest must needs cover the ground. At least there 
are some curious exceptions to such a general rule, — exceptions 
both ways. In the Sierra Nevada we are confronted with 
a stately forest along with a scanty rainfall, with rain only in 
the three winter months. All summer long, under those lofty 
trees, if you stir up the soil you may be choked with dust. 
On the other hand, the prairies of lowa and Illinois, which 
form deep bays or great islands in our own forest region, are 
spread under skies which drop more rain than jirobably ever 
falls on the slopes of the Sierra Nevada, and give it at all seasons. 
Under the lesser and brief rains we have the loftiest 
trees we know; under the more copious and well-dispersed 
rain, we have prairies, without forest at all. 
There is little more to say about the first part of this paradox; 
and I have not much to say about the other. The cause 
or origin of our prairies — of the unwooded districts this side 
of the Mississippi and Missouri — has been much discussed, 
and a whole hour would be needed to give a fair account of 
the different views taken upon this knotty question. The only 
settled thing about it is, that the prairies are not directly due 
to a deficiency of rain. That the rain-charts settle, as Professor 
Whitney well insists. 
The prairies which indent or are inclosed in our Atlantic 
forest region, and the plains beyond this region, are different 
things. But as the one borders — and in lowa and Nebraska 
passes into — the other, it may be supposed that common 
causes have influenced both together, perhaps more than Professor 
Whitney allows. 
He thinks that the extreme fineness and depth of the usual 
prairie soil will account for the absence of trees ; and Mr. 
Lesquereux equally explains it by the nature of the soil, in a 
different way. These and other excellent observers scout the 
idea that immemorial burnings, in autumn and spring, have 
had any effect. Professor Shaler, from his observations in the 
border land of Kentucky, thinks that they have, — that there 
are indications there of comparatively recent conversion of 
Oak-openings into prairie, and now — since the burnings are 
over — of the reconversion of prairie into woodland. 
I am disposed, on general considerations, to think that the 
line of demarcation between our woods and our plains is not 
where it was drawn by Nature. Here, when no physical barrier 
is interposed between the ground that receives rain enough 
for forest and that which receives too little, there must be a 
debatable border, where comparatively slight causes will turn 
the scale either way. Difference in soil and difference in exposure 
will here tell decisively. And along this border, annual 
burnings — for the purpose of increasing and improving Buffalo-feed 
— practised for hundreds of years by our nomade 
predecessors, may have had a very marked effect. I suspect that 
the irregular border line may have in this way been rendered 
more irregular, and have been carried farther eastward wherever 
nature of soil or circumstances of exposure predisposed 
to it. 
It does not follow that trees would reoccupy the land when 
the operation that destroyed them, or kept them down, ceased. 
The established turf or other occupation of the soil, and the 
sweeping winds, might prevent that. The difficulty of re-foresting 
bleak New England coasts, which were originally well 
wooded, is well known. It is equally but probably not more 
difficult to establish forest on an lowa prairie, with proper 
selection of trees. 
The difference in the composition of the Atlantic and Pacific 
forests is not less marked than that of the climate and 
geographical configuration to which the two are respectively 
adapted. 
With some very notable exceptions, the forests of the whole 
northern hemisphere in the temperate zone (those that we are 
concerned with) are mainly made up of the same or similar 
kinds. Not of the same species ; for rarely do identical trees 
occur in any two or more widely separated regions. But all 
round the world in our zone, the woods contain Pines and 
Firs and Larches, Cypresses and Junipers, Oaks and Birches, 
Willows and Poplars, Maples and Ashes, and the like. Yet 
with all these family likenesses throughout, each region has 
some peculiar features, some trees by which the country may 
at once be distinguished. 
Beginning by a comparison of our Pacific with our Atlantic 
forest, I need not take the time to enumerate the trees of the 
latter, as we all may be supposed to know them, and many of 
the genera will have to be mentioned in drawing the contrast 
to which I invite your attention. In this you will be impressed 
most of all, I think, with the fact that the greater part of our 
familiar trees are " conspicuous by their absence " from the 
Pacific forest. 
For example, it has no Magnolias, no Tulip-tree, no Papaw, 
no Linden or Basswood, and is very poor in Maples ; no Locust-tree 
— neither Flowering Locust nor Honey Locust — ■ 
nor any Leguminous tree ; no Cherry large enough for a timber-tree, 
like our wild Black Cherry ; no Gum-trees (Nyssa 
nor Liquidambar), nor Sorrel-tree, nor Kalmia ; no Persimsom, 
or Bumelia ; not a Holly ; only one Ash that may be 
called a timber-tree ; no Catalpa, or Sassafras ; not a single 
Elm, nor blackberry ; not a Mulberry, nor Planer-tree, nor 
Madura; not a Hickory, nor a Beech, nor a true Chestnut, 
nor a Hornbeam ; barely one Birch-tree, and that only far 
north, where the differences are less striking. But as to 
Coniferous trees, the only missing type is our Bald Cypress, 
the so-called Cypress of our southern swamps, and that deficiency 
is made up by other things. But as to ordinary trees, 
if you ask what takes the place in Oregon and California of 
all these missing kinds, which are familiar on our side of the 
continent, I must answer, nothing, or nearly nothing. There 
is the Madrona (Arbutus) instead of our Kalmia (both really 
trees in some places) ; and there is the California Laurel 
instead of our southern Red Bay tree. Nor in any of the 
genera common to the two does the Pacific forest equal the 
Atlantic in species. It has not half as many Maples, nor 
Ashes, nor Poplars, nor Walnuts, nor Birches, and those it 
has are of smaller size and inferior quality : it has not half 
as many Oaks ; and these and the Ashes are of so inferior 
economical value, that (as we are told) a passable wagonwheel 
cannot be made of California wood, nor a really good 
one in Oregon. 
This poverty of the western forest in species and types may 
be exhibited graphically, in a way which cannot fail to strike 
the eye more impressively than when we say that, whereas the 
Atlantic forest is composed of sixty-six genera and one hundred 
and fifty-five species, the Pacific forest has only thirtyone 
genera and seventy-eight species. 1 In the appended diagrams, 
the short side of the rectangle is proportional to the 
number of genera, the long side to the number of species. 
Now the geographical areas of the two forests are not very 
different. From the Gulf of Mexico to the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
about twenty degrees of latitude intervene. From the 
southern end of California to the peninsula of Alaska there 
1 We take in only timber trees, or such as attain in the most favorable 
localities to a size which gives them a clear title to the arboreous rank. 
The subtropical southern extremity and Keys of Florida are excluded. 
So also are one or two trees of the Arizonian region which may touch the 
evanescent southern borders of the Californian forest. In counting the 
coniferous genera, Pinus, Larix, Picea, Abies, and Tsuga are admitted to 
this rank, but Cupressus and Chamaecyparis are taken as one genus. 
are twenty-eight degrees, and the forest on the coast runs some 
degrees north of this ; the length may therefore make up for 
the comparative narrowness of the Pacific forest region. How 
can so meagre a forest make so imposing a show ? Surely 
not by the greater number and size of its individuals, so far 
as deciduous (or more correctly non-coniferous) trees are concerned 
; for on the whole they are inferior to their eastern 
brethren in size if not in number of individuals. The reason 
is, that a large proportion of the genera and species are 
coniferous trees; and these, being evergreen (except the 
Larches), of aspiring port and eminently gregarious habit, 
usually dominate where they occur. While the east has almost 
three times as many genera and four times as many species of 
non-coniferous trees as the west, it has slightly fewer genera 
and almost one half fewer species of coniferous trees than the 
west. That is, the Atlantic coniferous forest is represented 
by eleven genera and twenty-five species ; the Pacific by 
twelve genera and forty-four species. This relative preponderance 
may also be expressed by the diagrams, in which the 
smaller inclosed rectangles, drawn on the same scale, represent 
the coniferous portions of these forests. 
Indeed, the Pacific forest is made up of conifers, with nonconiferous 
trees as occasional undergrowth or as scattered 
individuals, and conspicuous only in valleys or in the sparse 
tree-growth of plains, on which the Oaks at most reproduce 
the features of the " Oak-openings " here and there bordering 
the Mississippi prairie region. Perhaps the most striking 
contrast between the west and the east, along the latitude 
usually traversed, is that between the spiry evergreens which 
the traveler leaves when he quits California, and the familiar 
woods of various-hued round-headed trees which give him the 
feeling of home when he reaches the Mississippi. The Atlantic 
forest is particularly rich in these, and is not meagre in 
coniferous trees. All the glory of the Pacific forest is in its 
coniferous trees ; its desperate poverty in other trees appears 
in the annexed diagram. 
These diagrams could be made more instructive, and the 
relative richness of the forests round the world in our latitude 
could be most simply exhibited, by the addition of two or 
three similar ones. Two would serve, one for Europe, the 
other for northeast Asia. A third would 'be the Himalay- 
Altaian region, geographically intermediate between the other 
two, as the Arizona-Rocky Mountain district is intermediate 
between our eastern and western. Both are here left out of 
view, partly for the same, partly for special reasons pertaining 
1 2 3 4 
1. Atlantic American Forest. ?>■ Japan-Mandehurian Forest. 
2. Pacific American Forest. 4. European Forest. 
to each, which I must not stop to explain. These four marked 
specimens will simply and clearly exhibit the general facts. 
Keeping as nearly as possible to the same scale, we may 
count the Indigenous forest trees of all Europe at thirty-three 
genera and ei°hty-five species ; and those of the Japan-Mandchurian 
region, of very much smaller geographical area, at 
sixty-six genera and one hundred and sixty-eight species. I 
here include in it only Japan, eastern Mandchuria, and the 
adjacent borders of China. The known species of trees must 
be rather roughly determined; but the numbers here given 
are not exaggerated, and are much more likely to be sensibly 
increased by further knowledge than are those of any of the 
other regions. Properly to estimate the surpassing richness 
of this Japan-Mandchurian forest, the comparative smallness 
of geographical area must come in as an important consideration. 

To complete the view, let it be noted that the division of 
these forests into coniferous and non-coniferous is, for the 
European, non-coniferous 26 genera, 68 species. 
coniferous 7 "17 
Total, 33 genera, 85 species. 
Japan-Mandchurian, non-coniferous . 47 genera, 123 species. 
" " coniferous . . 19 " 45 
Total, 66 genera, 168 species. 
In other words, a narrow region in eastern Asia contains 
twice as many genera and about twice as many species of indigenous 
trees as are possessed by all Europe ; and as to coniferous 
trees, the former has more genera than the latter has 
species, and over twice and a half as many species. 
The only question about the relation of these four forestregions, 
as to their component species, which we can here 
pause to answer, is to what extent they contain trees of identical 
species. If we took the shrubs, there would be a small 
number, if the herbs a very considerable number, of species 
common to the two New World and to the two Old World 
areas respectively, at least to their northern portions, even 
after excluding arctic-alpine plants. The same may be said, 
in its degree, of the north European flora compared with the 
Atlantic North American, of the northeast Asiatic compared 
with the northern part of the Pacific North American, and 
also in a peculiar way (which I have formerly pointed out 
and shall have soon to mention) of the northeastern Asiatic 
flora in its relations to the Atlantic North American. But 
a,s to the forest trees there is very little community of species. 
Yet this is not absolutely wanting. The Red Cedar (Juniperus 
Virginiana) among coniferous trees, and Populus 
tremuloides among the deciduous, extend across the American 
continent specifically unchanged, though hardly developed as 
forest trees on the Pacific side. There are probably, but not 
certainly, one or two instances on the northern verge of these 
two forests. There are as many in which eastern and western 
species are suggestively similar. The Hemlock Spruce of 
the northern Atlantic States and the Yew of Florida are extremely 
like corresponding trees of the Pacific forest ; indeed 
the Yew-trees of all four regions may come to be regarded as 
forms of one polymorphous species. The White Birch of 
Europe and that of Canada and New England are in similar 
case ; and so is the common Chestnut (in America confined 
to the Atlantic States), which on the other side of the world 
is also represented in Japan. A link in the other direction is 
seen in one Spruce-tree (called in Oregon Menzies Spruce) 
which inhabits northeast Asia, while a peculiar form of it 
represents the species in the Rocky Mountains. 
But now other and more theoretical questions come to be 
asked, such as these : — 
Why should our Pacific forest-region, which is rich and in 
some respects unique in coniferous, be so poor in deciduous 
trees ? 
Then the two Big Trees, Sequoias, as isolated in character 
as in location, — being found only in California, and having 
no near relatives anywhere, — how came California to have 
them ? 
Such relatives as the Sequoias have are also local, peculiar, 
and chiefly of one species to each genus. Only one of them 
is American, and that solely eastern, the Taxodium of our 
Atlantic States and the plateau of Mexico. The others are 
Japanese and Chinese. 
Why should trees of six related genera, which will all thrive 
in Europe, be restricted naturally, one to the eastern side of 
the American continent, one genus to the western side and 
very locally, the rest to a small portion of the eastern border 
of Asia? 
Why should coniferous trees most affect and preserve the 
greatest number of types in these parts of the world ? 
And why should the northeast Asian region have, in a 
comparatively small area, not only most coniferous trees, but 
a notably larger number of trees altogether than any other 
part of the northern temperate zone? Why should its only 
and near rival be in the antipodes, namely, here in Atlantic 
North America? In other words, why should the Pacific and 
the European forests be so poor in comparison, and why the 
Pacific poorest of all in deciduous, yet rich in coniferous 
trees ? 
The first step toward an explanation of the superior richness 
in trees of these antipodal regions, is to note some striking 
similarities of the two, and especially the number of 
peculiar types which they divide between them. The ultimate 
conclusion may at length be ventured, that this richness 
is normal, and that what we really have to explain is the absence 
of so many forms from Europe on the one hand, from 
Oregon and California on the other. Let me recall to mind 
the list of kinds (i. e. genera) of trees which enrich our Atlantic 
forest but are wanting to that of the Pacific. Now almost 
all these recur, in more or less similar but not identical 
species, in Japan, north China, etc. Some of them are likewise 
European, but more are not so. Extending the comparison 
to shrubs and herbs, it more and more appears, that 
the forms and types which we count as peculiar to our Atlantic 
region, when we compare them, as we first naturally 
do, with Europe and with our West, have their close counterparts 
in Japan and north China ; some in identical species 
(especially among the herbs), often in strikingly similar 
ones, not rarely as sole species of peculiar genera or in related 
generic types. I was a very young botanist when I began to 
notice this ; and I have from time to time made lists of such 
instances. Evidences of this remarkable relationship have 
multiplied year after year, until what was long a wonder has 
come to be so common that I should now not be greatly surprised 
if a Sarracenia or a Dionaea, or their like, should turn 
up in eastern Asia. Very few of such isolated types remain 
without counterparts. It is as if Nature, when she had 
enough species of a genus to go round, dealt them fairly, one 
at least to each quarter of our zone ; but when she had only 
two of some peculiar kind, gave one to us and the other to 
Japan, Mandchuria, or the tlimalayas ; when she had only one, 
divided these between the two partners on the opposite sides 
of the table. The result, as to the trees, is seen in these four 
diagrams. As to number of species generally, it cannot be 
said that Europe and Pacific North America are at all in 
arrears. But as to trees, either the contrasted regions have 
been exceptionally favored, or these have been hardly dealt 
with. There is, as I have intimated, some reason to adopt 
the latter alternative. 
We may take it for granted that the indigenous plants of 
any country, particularly the trees, have been selected by 
climate. Whatever other influences or circumstances have 
been brought to bear upon them, or the trees have brought to 
bear on each other, no tree could hold its place as a member 
of any forest or flora which is not adapted to endure even 
the extremes of the climate of the region or station. But 
the character of the climate will not explain the remarkable 
paucity of the trees which compose the indigenous European 
forest. That is proved by experiment, sufficiently prolonged 
in certain cases to justify the inference. Probably there is no 
tree of the northern temperate zone which will not flourish in 
some part of Europe. Great Britain alone can grow double 
or treble the number of trees that the Atlantic States can. 
In all the latter we can grow hardly one tree of the Pacific 
coast. England supports all of them, and all our Atlantic 
trees also, and likewise the Japanese and north Siberian species, 
which do thrive here remarkably in some part of the 
Atlantic coast, especially the cooler temperate ones. The 
poverty of the European sylva is attributable to the absence 
of our Atlantic American types, to its having no Magnolia, 
Liriodendron, Asimina, Negundo, no JEsculus, none of that 
rich assemblage of Leguminous trees represented by Locusts, 
Honey-Locusts, Gymnocladus, and Cladrastis (even its Cercis, 
which is hardly European, is like the Californian one 
mainly a shrub) ; no Nyssa, nor Liquidambar ; no Ericaceae, 
rising to a tree ; no Bumelia, Catalpa, Sassafras, Osage 
Orange, Hickory, or Walnut ; and as to Conifers, no Hem- 
lock Spruce, Arbor-Vitse, Taxodium, or Torreya. As compared 
with northeastern Asia, Europe wants most of these 
same types, also the Ailantus, Gingko, and a goodly number 
of coniferous genera. I cannot point to any types tending 
to make up the deficiency, that is, to any not either in east 
North America or in northeast Asia, or in both. Cedrus, 
the true Cedar, which comes near to it, is only north African 
and Asian. I need not say that Europe has no Sequoia, and 
shares no special type with California. 
Now the capital fact is, that many and perhaps almost all 
of these genera of trees were well represented in Europe 
throughout the later Tertiary times. It had not only the 
same generic types, but in some cases even the same species, 
or what must pass as such, in the lack of recognizable distinctions 
between fossil remains and living analogues. Probably 
the European Miocene forest was about as rich and various as 
is ours of the present day, and very like it. The Glacial period 
came and passed, and these types have not survived there, 
nor returned. Hence the comparative poverty of the existing 
European sylva, or, at least, the probable explanation of the 
absence of those kinds of trees which make the characteristic 
difference. 
Why did these trees perish out of Europe but survive in 
America and Asia? Before we inquire how Europe lost them, 
it may be well to ask, how it got them. How came these 
American trees to be in Europe ? And among the rest, how 
came Europe to have Sequoias, now represented only by our 
two Big Trees of California ? It actually possessed two species 
and more ; one so closely answering to the Redwood of the coast 
ranges, and another so very like the Sequoia gigantea of the 
Sierra Nevada, that, if such fossil twigs with leaves and cones 
had been exhumed in California instead of in Europe, it would 
confidently be affirmed that we had resurrected the veritable 
ancestors of our two giant trees. Indeed, so it may probably 
be. " Caelum non animam mutant," etc., may be applicable 
even to such wide wanderings and such vast intervals of time. 
If the specific essence has not changed, and even if it has suffered 
some change, genealogical connection is to be inferred 
in all such cases. 
That is, in these days it is taken for granted that individuals 
of the same species, or with a certain likeness throughout, 
had a single birthplace, and are descended from the same 
stock, no matter how widely separated they may have been 
either in space or time, or both. The contrary supposition 
may be made, and was seriously entertained by some not very 
long ago. It is even supposable that plants and animals originated 
where they now are, or where their remains are found. 
But this is not science ; in other words it is not conformable 
to what we now know, and is an assertion that scientific explanation 
is not to be sought. 
Furthermore, when species of the same genus are not found 
almost everywhere, they are usually grouped in one region, 
as are the Hickories in the Atlantic States, the Asters and 
Goldenrods in North America and prevailingly on the Atlantic 
side, the Heaths in western Europe and Africa. From 
this we are led to the inference that all species closely related 
to each other have had a common birthplace and origin. So 
that, when we find individuals of a species or of a group 
widely out of the range of their fellows, we wonder how they 
got there. When we find the same species all round the 
hemisphere, we ask how this dispersion came to pass. 
Now, a very considerable number of species of herbs and 
shrubs, and a few trees, of the temperate zone are found all 
round the northern hemisphere ; many others are found part 
way round, — some in Europe and eastern Asia; some in 
Europe and our Atlantic States ; many, as I have said, in the 
Atlantic States and eastern Asia ; fewer (which is curious) 
common to the Pacific States and eastern Asia, nearer though 
these countries be. 
We may set it down as useless to try to account for this distribution 
by causes now in operation and opportunities now 
afforded, i. e., for distribution across oceans by winds and currents, 
and birds. These means play their part in dispersion 
from place to place, by step after step, but not from continent 
to continent, except for few things and in a subordinate way. 
Fortunately we are not obliged to have recourse to overstrained 
suppositions of what might possibly have occurred 
now and then, in the lapse of time, by the chance conveyance 
of seeds across oceans, or even from one mountain to another. 
The plants of the top of the White Mountains and of Labrador 
are mainly the same ; but we need not suppose that it is 
so because birds have carried seeds from the one to the other. 
I take it that the true explanation of the whole problem 
comes from a just general view, and not through piecemeal 
suppositions of chances. And I am clear that it is to be found 
by looking to the north, to the state of things at the arctic 
zone, — first, as it now is, and then as it has been. 
North of our forest-regions comes the zone unwooded from 
cold, the zone of arctic vegetation. In this, as a rule, the 
species are the same round the world ; as exceptions, some are 
restricted to a part of the circle. 
The polar projection of the earth down to the northern 
tropic, as here exhibited, shows to the eye — as our maps do 
not — how all the lands come together into one region, and 
how natural it may be for the same species, under homogeneous 
conditions, to spread over it. When we know, moreover, 
that sea and land have varied greatly since these species existed, 
we may well believe that any ocean-gaps, now in the 
way of equable distribution, may have been bridged over. 
There is now only one considerable gap. 
What would happen if a cold period was to come on from 
the north, and was to carry very slowly the present arctic 
climate, or something like it, down far into the temperate 
zone ? Why, just what has happened in the Glacial period, 
when the refrigeration somehow pushed all these plants before 
it down to southern Europe, to middle Asia, to the middle 
and southern part of the United States ; and, at length receding, 
left some parts of them stranded on the Pyrenees, the 
Alps, the Apennines, the Caucasus, on our White and Rocky 
Mountains, or wherever they could escape the increasing 
warmth as well by ascending mountains as by receding northward 
at lower levels. Those that kept together at a low level, 
and made good their retreat, form the main body of present 
arctic vegetation. Those that took to the mountains had their 
line of retreat cut off, and hold their positions on the moun- 
tain-tops under cover of the frigid climate due to elevation. 
The conditions of these on different continents or different 
mountains are similar, but not wholly alike. Some species 
proved better adapted to one, some to another, part of the 
world ; where less adapted, or less adaptable, they have perished 
; where better adapted, they continue, — with or without 
some change ; and hence the diversification of alpine 
plants, as well as the general likeness through all the northern 
hemisphere. 
All this exactly applies to the temperate-zone vegetation, 
and to the trees that we are concerned with. The clew was 
seized when the fossil botany of the high arctic regions came 
to light; when it was demonstrated that in the times next 
preceding the Glacial period — in the latest Tertiary — from 
Spitzbergen and Iceland to Greenland and Kamtschatka, a 
climate like that we now enjoy prevailed, and forests like 
those of New England and Virginia, and of California, 
clothed the land. We infer the climate from the trees ; and 
the trees give sure indications of the climate. 
I had divined and published the explanation long before I 
knew of the fossil plants. These, since made known, render 
the inference sure, and give us a clear idea of just what the 
climate was. At the time we speak of, Greenland, Spitzbergen, 
and our arctic sea-shore had the climate of Pennsylvania 
and Virginia now. It would take too much time to enumerate 
the sorts of trees that have been identified by their leaves 
and fruits in the arctic later Tertiary deposits. 
I can only say, at large, that the same species have been 
found all round the world ; that the richest and most extensive 
finds are in Greenland ; that they comprise most of the 
sorts which I have spoken of as American trees which once 
lived in Europe, — Magnolias, Sassafras, Hickories, Gumtrees, 
our identical Southern Cypress (for all we can see of 
difference), and especially Sequoias, not only the two which 
obviously answer to the two Big Trees now peculiar to California, 
but several others ; that they equally comprise trees 
now peculiar to Japan and China, three kinds of Gino-kotrees, 
for instance, one of them not evidently distinguishable 
from the Japanese species which alone survives ; that we have 
evidence, not merely of Pines and Maples, Poplars, Birches, 
Lindens, and whatever else characterize the temperate-zone 
forests of our era, but also of particular species of these, so 
like those of our own time and country, that we may fairly 
reckon them as the ancestors of several of ours. Long genealogies 
always deal more or less in conjecture ; but we appear 
to be within the limits of scientific inference when we announce 
that our existing temperate trees came from the north, 
and within the bounds of nigh probability when we claim not 
a few of them as the originals of present species. Remains 
of the same plants have been found fossil in our temperate 
region, as well as in Europe. 
Here, then, we have reached a fair answer to the question 
how the same or similar species of our trees came to be so dispersed 
over such widely separated continents. The lands all 
diverge from a polar centre, and their proximate portions — 
however different from their present configuration and extent, 
and however changed at different times — were once the home 
of those trees, where they flourished in a temperate climate. 
The cold period which followed, and which doubtless came on 
by very slow degrees during ages of time, must have long 
before its culmination brought clown to our latitude, with 
the similar climate, the forest they possess now, or rather the 
ancestors of it. During this long (and we may believe first) 
occupancy of Europe and the United States, were deposited in 
pools and shallow waters the cast leaves, fruits, and occasionally 
the branches, which are imbedded in what are called Miocene 
Tertiary or later deposits, most abundant in Europe, from 
which the American character of the vegetation of the period 
is inferred. Geologists give the same name to these beds, in 
Greenland and southern Europe, because they contain the 
remains of identical or very similar species of plants ; and 
they used to regard them as of the same age on account of 
this identity. But in fact this identity is good evidence that 
they cannot be synchronous. The beds in the lower latitudes 
must be later, and were forming when Greenland probably 
had very nearly the climate which it has now. 
Wherefore the high, and not the low, latitudes must be 
assumed as the birthplace of our present flora ;2; 2 and the 
present arctic vegetation is best regarded as a derivative of 
the temperate. This flora, which when circumpolar was as 
nearly homogeneous round the high latitudes as the arctic 
vegetation is now, when slowly translated into lower latitudes, 
would preserve its homogeneousness enough to account for 
the actual distribution of the same and similar species round 
the world, and for the original endowment of Europe with 
what we now call American types. It would also vary or be 
selected from by the increasing differentiation of climate in 
the divergent continents, and on their different sides, in a way 
which might well account for the present diversification. 
From an early period, the system of the winds, the great 
ocean currents (however they may have oscillated north and 
south), and the general proportions and features of the continents 
in our latitude (at least of the American continent) 
were much the same as now, so that species of plants, ever so 
little adapted or predisposed to cold winters and hot summers, 
would abide and be developed on the eastern side of continents, 
therefore in the Atlantic States and in Japan and 
Mandchuria ; those with preference for milder winters would 
incline to the western sides; those disposed to tolerate dryness 
would tend to interiors, or to regions lacking summer rain. 
So that, if the same thousand species were thrust promiscuously 
into these several districts, and carried slowly onward 
in the way supposed, they would inevitably be sifted in such a 
manner that the survival of the fittest for each district might 
explain the present diversity. 
Besides, there are re-siftings to take into the account. The 
Glacial period or refrigeration from the north, which at its 
inception forced the temperate flora into our latitude, at its 
culmination must have carried much or most of it quite beyond. 
To what extent displaced, and how far superseded by 
1 This takes for granted, after Nordenskjbld, that there was no preceding 
Glacial period, as neither palaeontology nor the study of arctic 
sedimentary strata afford any evidence of it. Or if there was any, it 
was too remote in time to concern the present question. 
the vegetation which in our day borders the ice, or by ice itself, 
it is difficult to form more than general conjectures — so 
different and conflicting are the views of geologists upon the 
Glacial period. But upon any, or almost any, of these views, 
it is safe to conclude that temperate vegetation, such as preceded 
the refrigeration and has now again succeeded it, was 
either thrust out of northern Europe and the northern Atlantic 
States, or was reduced to precarious existence and diminished 
forms. It also appears that, on our own continent 
at least, a milder climate than the present, and a considerable 
submergence of land, transiently supervened at the north, to 
which the vegetation must have sensibly responded by a northward 
movement, from which it afterward receded. 
All these vicissitudes must have left their impress upon the 
actual vegetation, and particularly upon the trees. They furnish 
probable reason for the loss of American types sustained 
by Europe. 
I conceive that three things have conspired to this loss. 
First, Europe, hardly extending south of latitude 40°, is all 
within the limits generally assigned to severe glacial action. 
Second, its mountains trend east and west, from the Pyrenees 
to the Carpathians and the Caucasus beyond, near its southern 
border ; and they had glaciers of their own, which must have 
begun their operations, and poured down the northward 
flanks, while the plains were still covered with forest on the 
retreat from the great ice-wave coming from the north. Attacked 
both on front and rear, much of the forest must have 
perished then and there. Third, across the line of retreat of 
those which may have flanked the mountain-ranges, or were 
stationed south of them, stretched the Mediterranean, an impassable 
barrier. Some hardy trees may have eked out their 
existence on the northern shore of the Mediterranean and the 
Atlantic coast. But we doubt not, Taxodium and Sequoias, 
Magnolias and Liquidambars, and even Hickories and the 
like, were among the missing. Escape by the east, and rehabilitation 
from that quarter until a very late period, was 
apparently prevented by the prolongation of the Mediterranean 
to the Caspian, and thence to the Siberian ocean. If we 
accept the supposition of Nordenskjold, that anterior to the 
Glacial period, Europe was " bounded on the south by an 
ocean extending from the Atlantic over the present deserts of 
Sahara and Central Asia to the Pacific," all chance of these 
American types having escaped from or reentered Europe 
from the south and east, is excluded. Europe may thus be 
conceived to have been for a time somewhat in the condition 
in which Greenland is now, and indeed to have been connected 
with Greenland in this or in earlier times. Such a 
junction, cutting off access of the Gulf Stream to the Polar sea, 
would, as some think, other things remaining as they are, almost 
of itself give glaciation to Europe. Greenland may be 
referred to, by way of comparison, as a country which having 
undergone extreme glaciation, bears the marks of it in the extreme 
poverty of its flora, and in the absence of the plants 
to which its southern portion, extending six degrees below the 
arctic circle, might be entitled. It ought to have trees, and 
might support them. But since destruction by glaciation, no 
way has been open for their return. Europe fared much better, 
but suffered in its degree in a similar way. 
Turning for a moment to the American continent for a 
contrast, we find the land unbroken and open down to the 
tropic, and the mountains running north and south. The 
trees, when touched on the north by the on-coining refrigeration 
had only to move their southern border southward, along 
an open way, as far as the exigency required ; and there was 
no impediment to their due return. Then the more southern 
latitude of the United States gave great advantage over Eu- 
rope. On the Atlantic border, proper glaciation was felt 
only in the northern part, down to about latitude 40°. In 
the interior of the country, owing doubtless to greater dryness 
and summer heat, the limit receded greatly northward 
in the Mississippi Valley, and gave only local glaciers to the 
Rocky Mountains ; and no volcanic outbreaks or violent 
changes of any kind have here occurred since the types of our 
present vegetation came to the land. So our lines have been 
cast in pleasant places, and the goodly heritage of forest trees 
is one of the consequences. 
The still greater richness of northeast Asia in arboreal 
vegetation may find explanation in the prevalence of particularly 
favorable conditions, both ante-glacial and recent. The 
trees of the Miocene circumpolar forest appear to have found 
there a secure home; and the Japanese islands, to which 
most of these trees belong, must be remarkably adapted to 
them. The situation of these islands — analogous to that of 
Great Britain, but with the advantage of, lower latitude and 
greater sunshine, — their ample extent north and south, their 
diversified configuration, their proximity to the great Pacific 
gulf-stream, by which a vast body of warm water sweeps 
along their accentuated shores, and the comparatively equable 
diffusion of rain throughout the year, all probably conspire to 
the preservation and development of an originally ample inheritance. 

The case of the Pacific forest is remarkable and paradoxical. 
It is, as we know, the sole refuge of the most characteristic 
and widespread type of Miocene Coniferce, the Sequoias; 
it is rich in coniferous types beyond any country 
except Japan ; in its gold-bearing gravels are indications that 
it possessed, seemingly down to the very beginning of the 
Glacial period, Magnolias and Beeches, a true Chestnut, 
Liquidambar, Elms, and other trees now wholly wanting to 
that side of the continent, though common both to Japan and 
to Atlantic North America. 1 Any attempted explanation of 
this extreme paucity of the usually major constituents of forests, 
along with a great development of the minor, or coniferous, 
element, would take us quite too far, and would bring us 
to mere conjectures. 
Much may be attributed to late glaciation ; 2 something to 
the tremendous outpours of lava which, immediately before 
1 See, especially, " Report on the Fossil Plants of the auriferous gravel 
deposits of the Sierra Nevada," by L. Lesquereux ; " Mem. Mus. Comp. 
Zoology," vi. No. 2. — Determinations of fossil leaves, etc., such as these, 
may be relied on to this extent by the general botanist, however wary of 
specific and many generic identifications. These must be mainly left to 
the expert in fossil botany. 
2 Sir Joseph Hooker, in an important lecture delivered to the Royal 
Institution of Great Britain, April 12, insists much on this. 
the period of refrigeration, deeply covered a very large part 
of the forest-area ; much to the narrowness of the forest-belt, 
to the want of summer rain, and to the most unequal and 
precarious distribution of that of winter. 
Upon all these topics questions present themselves which 
we are not prepared to discuss. I have done all that I could 
hope to do in one lecture if I have distinctly shown that the 
races of trees, like the races of men, have come down to us 
through a prehistoric (or pre-natural historic) period ; and 
that the explanation of the present condition is to be sought 
in the past, and traced in vestiges and remains and survivals 
; that for the vegetable kingdom also there is a veritable 
Arclueology. 
THE PERTINACITY AND PREDOMINANCE OF WEEDS. 
A weed is defined by the dictionaries to be " Any useless 
or troublesome plant." " Every plant which grows in a field 
other than that of which the seed has been (intentionally) 
sown by the husbandman is a weed," says the " Penny Cyclopaedia," 
as cited in Worcester's Dictionary. The "Treasury of 
Botany "defines it as "Any plant which obtrusively occupies 
cultivated or dressed ground, to the exclusion or injury of 
some particular crop intended to be grown. Thus, even the 
most useful plants may become weeds if they appear out of 
their proper place. The term is sometimes applied to any insignificant-looking 
or unprofitable plants which grow profusely 
in a state of nature ; also to any noxious or useless plant." 
We may for present purposes consider weeds to be plants 
which tend to take prevalent possession of soil used for man's 
purposes, irrespective of his will ; and, in accordance with 
usage, we may restrict the term to herbs. This excludes predominant 
indigenous plants occupying ground in a state of 
nature. Such become weeds when they conspicuously intrude 
into cultivated fields, meadows, pastures, or the ground around 
dwellings. Many are unattractive,. but not a few are ornamental 
; many are injurious, but some are truly useful. 
White Clover is an instance of the latter. Bur Clover (Medicago 
denticulata) is in California very valuable as food for 
cattle and sheep, and very injurious by the damage which the 
burs cause to wool. In the United States, and perhaps in 
most parts of the world, a large majority of the weeds are 
introduced plants, brought into the country directly or indirectly 
by man. Some such as Dandelion, Yarrow, and probably 
the common Plantain and the common Purslane, are 
importations as weeds, although the species naturally occupy 
some part of the country. 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xviii. 161. (1879.) 
Why weeds are so pertinaceous and aggressive, is too large 
and loose a question : for any herb whatever when successfully 
aggressive becomes a weed ; and the reasons of predominance 
may be almost as diverse as the weeds themselves. 
But we may inquire, whether weeds have any common characteristic 
which may give them advantage, and why the 
greater part of the weeds of the United States, and probably 
of similar temperate countries, should be foreigners. 
As to the second question, this is strikingly the case 
throughout the Atlantic side of temperate North America, in 
which the weeds have mainly come from Europe ; but it is 
not so, or hardly so, west of the Mississippi in the region of 
prairies and plains. So that the answer we are accustomed to 
give must be to a great extent the true one, namely, that, as 
the district here in which weeds from the Old World prevail 
was naturally forest-clad, there were few of its native herbs 
which, if they could bear the exposure at all, were capable of 
competition on cleared land with emigrants from the Old 
World. It may be said that these same European weeds, 
here prepotent, had survived and adapted themselves to the 
change from forest to cleared land in Europe, and therefore 
our forest-bred herbs might have done the same thing here. 
But in the first place the change must have been far more 
sudden here than in Europe ; and in the next place, we suppose 
that most of the herbs in question never were indigenous 
to the originally forest-covered regions of the Old World ; 
but rather, as western and northern Europe became agricultural 
and pastoral, these plants came with the husbandmen 
and the flocks, or followed them, from the woodless or 
sparsely wooded regions farther east where they originated. 
This, however, will not hold for some of them, such as Dandelion, 
Yarrow, and Ox-eye Daisy. It may be said that our 
weeds might have come to a considerable extent from the 
bordering more open districts on the west and south. But 
there was little opportunity until recently, as the settlement 
of the country began on the eastern border ; yet a certain 
number of our weeds appear to have been thus derived : 
for instance, Mollugo verticillata, Erigeron Canadense, 
Xanthium, Ambrosia artemisimfolia, Verbena hastata, V. 
wticifolia, etc., Veronica peregrina, Solanum Carolinense, 
various species of Amarantus and Euphorbia, Panicum capillare, 
etc. Of late, and in consequence of increased communication 
with the Mississippi region and beyond — especially 
by railroads — other plants are coming into the eastern 
States as weeds, step by step, by somewhat rapid strides ; 
such as Dysodia chrysanthemoides, Matricaria discoidea, 
and Artemisia biennis. Fifty years ago Pludbeckia hirta, 
which flourished from the Alleghanies westward, was unknown 
farther east. Now since twenty years, it is an abundant and 
conspicuous weed in grass-fields throughout the eastern States, 
having been accidentally desimated with Red Clover seed 
from the western States. 
There are also native American weeds, doubtless indigenous 
to the region, such as Asclepias Cornuti, Antennaria margaritacea, 
and A. plantaginifolia, and in enriched soils Phytolacca 
decandra, which have apparently become strongly aggressive 
under changed conditions. These are some of the 
instances which may show that predominance is not in consequence 
of change of country and introduction to new soil. 
In many cases it is easy to explain why a plant, once introduced, 
should take a strong and persistent hold and spread 
rapidly. In others we discern nothing in the plant itself 
which should give it advantage. Lespedeza striata is a small 
and insignificant annual, with no obvious provision for dissemination. 
It is a native of China and Japan. In some unexplained 
way it reached Alabama and Georgia, and was first 
noticed about thirty-five years ago ; it has spread rapidly 
since, especially over old fields and along roadsides, and it is 
now very abundant up to Virginia and Tennessee, throughout 
the middle and upper districts, reaching even to the summits 
of the mountains of moderate elevation. In the absence of 
better food it is greedily eaten by cattle and sheep. The 
voiding by them of undigested seeds must be the means of 
dissemination ; but one cannot well understand why it should 
spread so widely and rapidly, and take such complete possession 
of the ground. It is one of the few weeds which are 
accounted a blessing. 
PERTINACITY AND PREDOMINANCE OF WEEDS. 237 
Professor Claypole, of Antioch College, Ohio, has recently 
contributed to the " Third Report of the Montreal Horticultural 
Society " (1877-8) an interesting essay, " On the Migration 
of Plants from Europe to America, with an Attempt to 
explain Certain Phenomena connected therewith." The phenomena 
which he would explain are the, abundant migration 
of numerous weeds from Europe to the shore of North America, 
while others fail to come, and the general failure of North 
American weeds to invade Europe. We have offered a fairly 
good explanation of the first. And Professor Claypole goes 
far toward explaining the second when he notes that seed is 
(or formerly was) mainly brought from the Old World to the 
New, and the same may be said of cattle and other emigration 
; that the cooler and shorter summer of the north of Europe 
renders the ripening of some seed precarious, etc. Fie 
does not mention the fact that American plants by chance 
reaching Europe have to compete with a vegetable world in 
comparatively stable equilibrium of its species, while European 
weeds coming —or which formerly came —to the 
United States found the course of nature disturbed by man 
and new-made fields for which they could compete with advantage. 
But this ingenious hypothesis is that weeds have a 
peculiarly " plastic nature, one capable of being moulded by 
and to the new surroundings," by which the plant " ere long 
adapts itself, if the change is not too great or sudden, to its 
new situation, takes out a new lease of life, and continues in 
the strictest sense a weed ; that the plants of the European 
flora possess more of this plasticity, are less unyielding in 
their constitution, can adapt themselves more readily to new 
surroundings," and that it is " the lack of this plasticity in 
the American flora which incapacitates it from securing a foothold 
and obtaining a living in the different conditions of the 
New World ; " that although "in the Miocene era the European 
and American floras were very much alike," yet " since 
that era the European flora has been vastly altered, while the 
American flora still retains a Miocene aspect, and is therefore 
the elder of the two ; that this long persistence of type in 
the American flora may have induced, by habit, a rigidity or 
indisposition to change ; " that " the European is thus better 
able to adapt itself to the strange climate and conditions — 
that is to emigrate — than the American : and thus, being 
more plastic or adaptable, it succeeds in the New World, 
while the less adaptable American flora fails in the Old 
World." 
So far as we know, the greater plasticity of European 
as compared with American plants is purely hypothetical. 
" More plastic " would mean of greater variability, which, if 
true, might be determined by observation. Because Europe 
once had more species or types in common with North America 
than it now has, it does not seem to follow that the former 
has "a younger plant-life," or that its existing plants are more 
recent than those of the American flora. And as already intimated, 
so refined an hypothesis is hardly necessary for the 
probable explanation of the predominance of Old World weeds 
in the Atlantic United States. 
Mr. Henslow, in his remarkable memoir, "On the Self- 
Fertilization of Plants," derives from different but equally 
theoretical premises an opposite conclusion, — namely, that 
weeds or intrusive and dominant plants in general, and of 
great emigrating capabilities, have " a longer ancestral lifehistory 
than their less aggressive relatives." He also maintains 
that weeds, and plants best fitted for domination in the 
manner of weeds, possess a common characteristic to which 
this dominance may be attributed, namely, that they are in 
general self-fertilized plants. A rapid generalizer might find 
confirmation of this in the converse, which is obviously true, 
that plants with blossoms very specially adapted for cross-fertilization 
by particular insects, and therefore dependent on 
such special aid, are comparatively local and unaggressive ; 
yet some of these are widely distributed. It will also be 
understood that self-fertilization may give advantage to an 
intruding plant at the outset by enabling an exceptionally 
well-fitted individual to initiate a favored race. And selffertilization, 
with its sureness, would always be most advantageous 
unless cross-fertilization brings some compensatory 
advantage greater on the whole than that of immediate sureness 
to fertilize. 
But the test of the theory is, whether weeds and emigrating 
herbs in general are more self-fertilizing or less subject to 
cross-fertilization than the majority of related plants, and 
whether many or any of them are actually self -fertilized 
through a succession of generations. It seemed to us that, in 
a limited way, the weeds which Europe has given to North 
America might answer this question. To keep within bounds 
and to have a case with all the data unquestionable, we will 
collate the weeds of European parentage which evince a dominating 
character in the United States east of the Mississippi, 
referring for the purpose to the " Manual of Botany of the 
Northern United States " and Chapman's " Flora of the 
Southern States." The latter, however, adds not a single 
weed from Europe of any predominance. We include only 
those which have taken a strong hold and become prominent 
either by their general diffusion over the area or by taking 
marked possession of certain districts. For examples of the 
latter take Echium vulgare in Virginia, Ranunculus bidbosus 
and Leontodon autumnale in eastern New England, and Genista 
tinctoria, which covers certain tracts in the eastern part 
of Massachusetts, although nearly unknown elsewhere. We 
must include several species which as weeds came from Europe, 
although they are probably, some of them undoubtedly, 
indigenous to some part of the United States. 
The following are the herbaceous plants naturalized from 
Europe and of an aggressive character in the Atlantic United 
States. Herbs of recent introduction, and those of however 
ancient naturalization which have not either spread widely or 
increased greatly over a considerable district, are omitted. 
The eighteen sjiecies in italic type, nearly half of them 
Grasses, are probably indigenous to some portions of North 
America. In some cases the introduced and the indigenous 
plants have come into contact. 
Ranunculus bulbosus. Raphanus Raphanis- Silene inflata. 
Ranunculus acris. trum. Lychnis Githago. 
Nasturtium officinale. Capsella Bursa-pastoris. Stellaria media. 
Sisymbium officinale. Reseda Luteola. Portulaca oleracea. 
Brassica Sinipistrum. Saponaria officinalis. Malva rotundifolia. 
Genista tinetoria. Mentha viridis. Allium vineale. 
Trifolium arvense. Mentha piperita. Alopecurus pratensis. 
Trifolium agrarium. Calamintha Nepeta. Phleum pratense. 
Trifolium repens. Calamintha Clinopodium. Agrostis vulgaris. 
Daucus Carota. Nepeta Cataria. Agrostis alba. 
Pastinaea sativa. Nepeta Gleehoma. Dactylis glomerata. 
Conium maculatum. Marrubium vulgare. Poa annua. 
Tussilago Farfara. Galeopsis Tetrahit. Poa compressa. 
Inula Helenium Leonurus Cardiaca. Poa pratensis. 
Gnaphalium uliginosum. Lamium amplexicaule. Poa tfivialis. 
Anthemis Cotula. Echium vulgare. Eragrostis pc 
Eragrostis poseoides. 
Achillcea Millefolium. Symphytum officinale. Festuca ovina. 
Tanaeetum vulgare. Echinospermum Lap- Festuca pratensis. 
Leucanthemnm vulgare. pula. Bromus secalinus. 
Bromns secalinus. 
Cirsium arvense. Cynoglossum officinale. Lolium perenne. 
Cirsium lanceolatum. Solanum nigrum. Triticum repens. 
Lappa officinalis. Chenopodium album. Triticum caninum. 
Cichorium Intybus. Chenopodium hybri- Anthoxanthum odora- 
Leontodon autumnale. dam. turn. 
turn. 
Taraxacum Dens-leonis. Chenopodium Botrys. Panicum glabrum. 
Plantago major. Polygonum aviculare. Panicum sanguinale. 
Plantago lanceolata. Polygonum Convolvu- Panicum Crus-galli. 
Anagallis arvensis. lus. Setaria glauca. 
Verbascum Thapsus. Rumex crispus. Setaria virdis. 
Verbascum Blattaria. Rumex sanguineus. 
Linaria vulgaris. Rumex Acetosella. 
The plants of this list, regarded as weeds, are of very various 
character ; and several of them, such as White Clover 
and most of the Grasses, where most dominant, do not fall 
under the ordinary definition of weeds at all, but under that 
of plants useful to the farmer. Some, like Purslane, are only 
garden weeds ; some belong to pastures and meadows ; others 
affect roadsides. The fewness of European corn-weeds is 
remarkable. Ches and Corn-cockle (Lychnis Githago) are 
the only ones on the list. Corn Poppy, Bluebottle and Knapweed 
(Centaurea Cyanus and C. nigra) and Larkspur are 
conspicuously wanting ; but the last two are not wholly unknown 
in some parts of the country. 
But the only question before us is, whether these plants introduced 
from Europe are or are not self-fertilized, or more 
habitually so than others, so that this may be accounted an 
PERTINACITY AND PREDOMINANCE OF WEEDS. 241 
element of their predominance. Apparently this question 
must be answered in the negative. The question is not 
whether they are self-fertilizable. The great majority of 
plants are so, even of those specially adapted for intercrossing. 
The plants of this list appear to belong to the juste milieu. 
Only one (Rumex Acetosella) is completely dioecious ; 
a few are incompletely dioecious or polygamous ; the two species 
of Plantago are dichogamous to the extent of necessary 
dioicism or monoicism ; a large number of the corolline species 
are either proterandrous or proterogynous, including two 
or three anemophilous species ; and all the Grasses (which 
form the last quarter of the list) are anemophilous and more 
or less dichogamous, and therefore not rarely cross-fertilized. 
Of those which are not anemophilous we notice none which 
are not habitually visited by insects (except perhaps Gnaphalium 
uliginosum), and which therefore are almost as likely to 
be cross-fertilized as close-fertilized ; while in not a few (such 
as the Compositce generally and most of the other GamopetalaP) 
the arrangements which favor intercrossing are explicit. 
There is no cleistogamous and therefore necessarily self-fertilized 
plant in the list, except Lamiuum amplexicaule, which 
also cross-fertilizes freely. 
In California the prevalent weeds are largely different from 
those of the Atlantic States, and, as would be expected, are 
mostly of indigenous species or immigrants from South America 
; yet the common weeds of the Old World, especially of 
southern Europe, are coming in. The well-established and 
aggressive ones, such as Brassica nigra, Silene Galliea, Erodium 
cicutarium, Malva borealis, Medicago denticulata, Marrubium 
vulgare, and Avena sterilis, were perhaps introduced 
by way of western South America. They are mostly plants 
capable of self-fertilization, but also with adaptations (of dichogamy 
and otherwise) which must secure occasional crossing. 
We cannot avoid the conclusion that self-fertilization is 
neither the cause nor a perceptible cause of the prepotency 
of the European plants which are weeds in North America. 
A cursory examination brings us to a similar conclusion as 
respects the indigenous weeds of the Atlantic States, those 
herbs which under new conditions, have propagated most 
abundantly and rapidly, and competed most successfully in 
the strife for the possession of fields that have taken the 
place of forest. The most aggressive of these in the Northern 
States are Epilobium spicatum in the newest clearings, 
which is dichogamous (proterandrous) to a degree which 
practically forbids self-fertilization ; and in older fields, Asclepias 
Cornuti, which is specially adapted for cross-fertilization 
by flying insects ; Antennaria plantaginifolia and A. 
margaritacea, which are dioecious ; and next to these perhaps 
the two wild Strawberries, then Erigeron annuum and 
E. strigosum, with certain Asters and Goldenrods, all insectvisited 
and dichogamous, and Verbena hastata, V. urticifolia, 
etc., the frequent natural hybridization of which testifies to 
habitual intercrossing. 
Those who suppose that only conspicuous or odorous flowers 
are visited by flying insects should see how bees throng the 
small, greenish, and to us odorless blossoms of Ampelopsis or 
Virginia Creeper and of its Japanese relative. 
THE FLORA OF NORTH AMERICA. 
In the remarks which I have to offer to this Section, you 
will understand the word " Flora " to be written with a capital 
initial. lam to speak of the attempts made in my own 
day, and still making, to provide our botanists with a compendious 
systematic account of the phsenogamous vegetation 
of the whole country which the American Association calls 
its own. 
I shall make no effort to avoid the personal turn which my 
narrative is likely to take. In fact, it will be seen that I 
have partly a personal object in drawing up this statement. 
Only two Floras of North America have ever been published 
as completed works, that of Michaux and that of Pursh. 
A third was begun (by Dr. Torrey, assisted by a young man 
who is no longer young), by the publication in the summer of 
1838 of a first fasciculus ; the first volume of 700 pages was 
issued two years afterward ; and 500 pages of the second volume 
appeared in 1841 and in the early part of 1843. The 
time for continuing it in the original form has long ago passed 
by. Its completion in the form in which I have undertaken 
it anew is precarious. Precarious in the original sense of the 
word, for it is certainly to be prayed for : precarious, too, m 
the current sense of the word as being uncertain ; yet not so, 
according to an accepted definition, namely : " uncertain, because 
depending upon the will of another ; " for it is not our 
will but our power that is in question ; and it is only by the 
combined powers and efforts of all of us interested in Botany 
that the desired end can possibly be attained. 
1 A paper read to the Botanists at the meeting of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science, at Montreal, August 25, 1882, 
American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxiv. 321. 
It were well to consider for a moment how and why it is 
that a task which has twice been — it would seem — easily accomplished 
has now become so difficult. 
The earliest North American Flora, that of the elder Mi- , 
chaux, appeared in the year 1803. It was based entirely 
upon Michaux's own collections and observations, does not 
contain any plants which he had not himself gathered or seen, 
is not, therefore, an exhaustive summary of the botany of the 
country as then known, and so was the more readily prepared. 
Michaux came to this country in 1785, returned to France in 
1796, left it again in Baudin's expedition to Australia in 1800, 
and died of fever in Madagascar in 1802. The Flora purports 
to be edited by his son, F. A. Michaux, who signed the 
classical Latin preface. The finish of the specific characters, 
and especially the capital detailed characters of the new genera, 
reveal the hand of a master ; and tradition has it that 
these were drawn up by Louis Claude Richard, who was probably 
the ablest botanist of his time. This tradition is confirmed 
by the fact that Richard's herbarium (bequeathed to 
his son, and now belonging to Count Franqueville) contains 
an almost complete set of the plants described, and I found 
that the specimens of Michaux supplied to Willdenow's herbarium 
at Berlin were ticketed and sent by Richard. Not 
only the younger Richard but Kunth also habitually cited the 
new genera of the work as of Richard, and some others have 
followed this example. Singularly enough, however, there is 
no reference whatever to Richard in any part of the Flora, 
nor in the elaborate preface. The most venerable botanist 
now living told me that there was a tradition at Paris that 
Richard performed a similar work for Persoon's " Synopsis 
Plantarum," and that he declined all mention of his name in 
the Synopsis and in the Flora, because the two works — contrary 
to the French school — were arranged upon the Linnaean 
Artificial System. He had his way, and the tradition 
may be preserved in history ; but his name cannot be cited for 
the genera Elytraria, Micranthemum, Elodea, Stipulicida, 
Dichromena, Oryzopsis, Erianthus, and the like. For, by the 
record these are of Michaux, " Flora Boreali-Americana," 
/ 
and not of Richard. 
244 ESSAYS. 
Michaux's explorations extended from Hudson's Bay, which 
he reached by way of the Saguenay, to Florida, as far, at 
least as St. Augustine and Pensacola ; he was the first botanical 
explorer of the higher Alleghany Mountains, and, crossing 
these mountains in Tennessee, he reached the Mississippi 
in Illinois, and was as far south as Natchez. His original 
itinerary, which I once consulted, is preserved by the American 
Philosophical Society, at Philadelphia, to which it was 
presented by his son. It ought to be printed. That little 
journal shows that it was not Michaux's fault that the first 
Flora of North America was restricted to the district east of 
the Mississippi River. He had a scheme for crossing the continent 
to the Pacific. Fie warmly solicited the government at 
Washington to undertake such an exploration, and offered to 
accompany it as naturalist. This may have been the germ 
or the fertilizing idea of the expedition of Lewis and Clark, 
which was sent out a few years afterward by Jefferson, to 
whom, if I rightly remember, Michaux addressed his enterprising 
proposal. 
Leaving out the Cryptogams of lower rank than the Ferns, 
we find that the Flora of Michaux, published at the beginning 
of this century, say eighty years ago, contains 1530 
species, in 528 genera. No very formidable number ; as to 
species (speaking without a count) little over half as many as 
are described in my " Manual of the Botany of the Northern 
States," which covers less than half of Michaux's area. 
Eleven years afterward, namely, in the year 1814 (the 
preface is dated December, 1813), appeared the second Flora 
of North America, namely, the " Flora Americae Septentrionalis," 
by Frederick Pursh. This was not confined to the 
author's own collections, but aimed at completeness, or to give 
" a systematic arrangement and description of the plants of 
North America, containing, besides what have been described 
by preceding authors, many new and rare species, collected 
during twelve years' travels and residence in that country." 
It appears that Pursh was born at Tobolsk, in Siberia, of 
what parentage we do not know. Fie himself tells us, in his 
preface, that he was educated in Dresden, and that he came 
to this country — to Baltimore and Philadelphia — at the close 
of the last century, when he must have been only twenty-five 
years old. He was able to make the acquaintance not only 
of Muhlenberg, who survived until 1815, and of William 
Bartram, who died in 1823, but also of the veteran, Humphrey 
Marshall, who died in 1805. His early and principal patron 
was Dr. Benjamin Smith Barton, who supplied the means for 
most of the travels which he was able to undertake, and who, 
as Pursh states, " for some time previous had been collecting 
materials for an American Flora." Pursh's personal explorations 
were not extensive. From 1802 till 1805 he was in 
charge of the gardens of William Hamilton, near Philadelphia. 
In the spring of the latter year, as he says, he " set out for 
the mountains and western territories of the southern States, 
beginning at Maryland and extending to the Carolinas (in 
which tract the interesting high mountains of Virginia and 
Carolina took my particular attention), returning late in the 
autumn through the lower countries along the sea-coast to 
Philadelphia." But, in tracing his steps by his collections a 
and by other indications, it appears that he did not reach the 
western borders of Virginia nor cross its southern boundary 
into the mountains of North Carolina. The Peaks of Otter 
and Salt-pond Mountain (now Mountain Lake) were the 
highest elevations which he attained. Pursh's preface continues 
: " The following season, 1806, I went in like manner 
over the northern States, beginning with the mountains of 
Pennsylvania and extending to those of New Hampshire (in 
which tract I traversed the extensive and highly interesting 
country of the Lesser and Great Lakes), and returning as 
before by the sea-coast." The diary of this expedition, found 
among Dr. Barton's papers and collection in possession of the 
American Philosophical Society, has recently been printed by 
the late Mr. Thomas Potts James. It shows that the journey 
was not as extended or as thorough as would be supposed ; 
that it was from Philadelphia directly north to the Pokono 
Mountains, thence to Onondaga, and to Oswego, — the only 
point on the Great Lakes reached, — thence back to Utica, 
1 In herb. Barton and herb. Lambert. 
246 ESSA YS. 
down the Mohawk Valley to Saratoga, and north to the upper 
part of Lake Champlain and to the lesser Green Mountains 
in the vicinity of Rutland, but not beyond. Discouraged by 
the lateness of the season, and disheartened —as he had all 
along been —by the failure and insufficiency of remittances 
from his patron, Pursh turned back from Rutland on the 22d 
of September, reached New York on the Ist of October, and 
Philadelphia on the sth. The next year (1807) Pursh took 
charge of the Botanic Garden which Dr. Hosack had formed 
at New York and afterward sold to the State, which soon 
made it over to Columbia College. l In 1810, he made 
a voyage to the West Indies for the recovery of his health. 
Returning in the autumn of 1811, he landed at Wiscasset, in 
Maine, "had an opportunity of visiting Professor Peck of 
Cambridge College, near Boston," and of seeing the alpine 
plants which Peck had collected on the White Mountains. 2 
At the end of the latter year or early in 1812 he went to 
England with his collections and notes ; and at the close of 
1813, under the auspices of Lambert, he produced his Flora, 
consulting, the while, the herbaria of Clayton, Pallas, Plukenet, 
Catesby, Morison, Sherard, Walter, and that of Banks. 
Evidently such consultations and the whole study must have 
1 Expecting, no doubt, that it would be kept up. But the Elgin Botanic 
Garden was soon discontinued. It occupied the block of ground 
now covered by the buildings of the College, and the surrounding tract — 
now so valuable — from which the college derives an ample revenue. 
Noblesse oblige, and it may be expected that the College, so enriched, will, 
before long, provide itself with a botanical professorship, and see to the 
careful preservation and maintenance of the precious Torrey Herbarium, 
which it possesses along with other subsidiary herbaria. 
2 It is at Wiscasset, therefore, that Pursh's "Plantago cucullata, Lam. 
... in wet rocky situations, Canada and Province of Maine," is to be 
sought. Mr. Pringle has recently found the related P. Cornuti (which 
may be the plant meant), in Lower Canada, not far from the other side 
of Maine. 
It must have been in Professor Peck's herbarium (no longer extant), 
that Pursh saw what he took to be Alchemilla alpina, which he marks 
"v. s." and refers to from memory only, probably mistakenly. For it 
has not since been detected either in Vermont or New Hampshire or 
anywhere in North America ; and Pursh's Journal makes it certain that 
he did not reach any alpine region in the Green Mountains. 
been rapid. The despatch is wonderful. One can hardly 
understand the ground of the statement made by Lambert to 
my former colleague, Dr. Torrey, that he was obliged to shut 
Pursh up in his house in order to keep him at his work. 
I know not how Pursh was occupied for the next four years, 
nor when he came to Canada. But he died here at Montreal, 
in 1820, at the early age of forty-six. More is probably 
known of him here. If I rightly remember, his grave has 
been identified, and a stone placed upon it inscribed to his 
memory. 1 A tradition has come down to us — and it is partly 
confirmed by a statement which Lambert used to make, in 
reference to the vast quantity of beer he had to furnish during 
the preparation of the Flora — that, in his latter days, our 
predecessor was given to drink, and that his days were thereby 
shortened. 
In Pursh's Flora we begin to have plants from the Great 
Plains, the Rocky Mountains, and the Pacific coast, although 
the collections were very scanty. The most important one 
which fell into Pursh's hands was that of about 150 specimens, 
gathered by Lewis and Clark on their homeward journey from 
the mouth of the Columbia River. A larger collection, more 
leisurely made on the outward journey, was lost. Menzies in 
Vancouver's voyage had botanized on the Pacific coast, both 
in California and much farther north. Some of his plants 
were seen by Pursh in the Banksian herbarium, and taken 
up. I may here say that in the winter of 1838-39 I had the 
pleasure of making the acquaintance of the venerable Menzies, 
then about ninety-five years old. 
In the Supplement, Pursh was able to include a considerable 
1 In the Canadian Naturalist, Principal Dawson gives a brief account 
of the transference of the remains of Pursh from a grave-yard below 
Montreal, in which they were interred, to the beautiful Mount Royal 
Cemetery, where they rest in a lot purchased for the purpose and under 
a neat and durable granite monument, provided by the naturalists of 
Montreal and their friends. A small company of botanists, led by Dr. 
Dawson, visited the spot shortly after the reading of this paper. We 
learned that Pursh had botanized largely in Canada, in view of a Canadian 
Flora, and that his collections were consumed by a fire at Quebec shortly 
before his death, to his extreme discouragement. 
number of species, collected by Bradbury on the upper Missouri, 
in what was then called Upper Louisiana, — much to 
the discontent of Nuttall, who was in that region at the same 
time, and who, indeed, partly and imperfectly anticipated 
Pursh in certain cases, through the publication by the Frasers 
of a catalogue of some of the plants collected by Nuttall. 
To come now to the extent of Pursh's Flora, published 
nearly sixty-nine years ago. It contains 740 genera of Phaenogamous 
and Filicoid plants, and 3076 species, — just about 
double the number of species contained in Michaux's Flora 
of eleven years before. 
I must omit all mention of more restricted works, even such 
as Nuttall's " Genera of North American Plants," which came 
only four years after Pursh's Flora ; also the " Flora Boreali- 
Americana" of Sir William Hooker, which began in 1829, 
but was restricted to British America. I cannot say how early 
it was that my revered master, Dr. Torrey, conceived the idea 
of the Flora which he at length undertook. But he once told 
me that he had invited Nuttall to join him in the production 
of such a work, and that Nuttall declined. This must have 
been as early as the year 1832, that is, half a century ago. 
My correspondence with Dr. Torrey began in the summer of 
1830, when I was a young medical student, and three or four 
years afterward I joined him at New York and became, for 
a short time, his assistant, for all the rest of his life, his 
botanical colleague. He was very much occupied with his 
duties as professor, chiefly of chemistry ; he had not yet abandoned 
the idea of completing his " Flora of the Northern and 
Middle States," the first volume of which was finished in 
1824, while yet free from all professional cares. Although 
working in the direction of the larger undertaking, the "Flora 
of North America " did not assume definite shape before the 
year 1835. I believe that some of the first actually-prepared 
manuscript for it was written by myself in that or the following 
year. I was then and for a long time expecting to accompany 
the South Pacific Exploring Expedition, as originally 
organized under the command of Commodore Ap Catesby 
Jones, but which was subject to long delay and many vicissi- 
tudes ; during which, having plentiful leisure, I tried my prentice 
hand upon some of the earlier natural orders. Before 
the expedition, as modified, was ready to sail, under the command 
of Captain Wilkes, I had accepted Dr. Torrey's proposal 
that I should be his associate in the work upon which I 
had made a small beginning as a volunteer. Two parts, or 
half, of the first volume (360 pages), of this Flora, were 
printed and issued in July and October, 1838. 
It was thought at first, in all simplicity, that the whole task 
could be done at something like this rate. But, apart from 
other considerations, it soon became clear that there had been 
no proper identification of the foundation-species of the earlier 
botanists, from Linnaeus downward ; and that our Flora could 
not go on satisfactorily without this. Dr. Torrey had, indeed, 
some years before, made a hasty visit to Hooker at Glasgow, 
to London, and to Paris ; but the taking of a few notes upon 
some particular plants in the herbaria of Hooker, Lambert, 
and Michaux, and the acquisition, from Hooker, of a good set 
of the Arctic plants of the British explorers, was about all 
that had been done. I proposed to attempt something more ; 
so, taking advantage of a favorable opportunity, I sailed for 
Liverpool in November, 1838, and devoted a good part of the 
ensuing year to the examination of the principal herbaria, 
which I need not here specify, in Scotland (where the important 
one of Sir William Hooker still remained), England, 
France, Switzerland, and Germany, namely those which contained 
the specimens upon which most of the then-published 
North American species had been directly or indirectly 
founded, especially those of Linnseus and Gronovius, of 
Walter, of Aiton's " Hortus Kewensis," Michaux, Wildenow, 
Pursh, and the later ones of De Candolle and Hooker. 
After my return the work made good progress ; the remaining 
half of the first volume was brought out in the spring of 
the year 1840, and by the spring of 1843 the five hundred 
pages of the second volume, mostly occupied by the vast order 
Composites, had been issued. But meanwhile I had in my 
turn to assume professorial duties and incident engagements, 
— with the result that, although the study of North Ameri- 
can plants was at no time pretermitted, either by Dr. Torrey 
while he lived, or by myself, we were unable to continue the 
publication during my associate's lifetime ; and it was only 
recently, in the spring of 1878, that I succeeded in bringing 
out, in a changed form, another instalment of the work, completing 
the Gamopetalaj. 
In the interval I had made two year-long visits to Europe 
for botanical investigation, the first partly relating to the botany 
of the South Pacific, the second wholly in view of the 
North American flora. And since this last publication still 
another visit — the fourth and we may suppose the last — of 
the same character and the same duration, has been successfully 
accomplished. 
The serious question, in which we are all concerned, arises, 
whether this work can be carried through to completion, and 
the older parts (wholly out of print and out of date), reelaborated, 
— I will not say by my hands, but in my time, or soon 
enough to render the whole 3 reasonably full and homogeneous 
representation of the North American flora, as known in 
this latter part of the nineteenth century. And it brings us 
to consider why the undertaking to which so much time has 
been devoted should be so slow of accomplishment. 
If this slowness is a constant wonder and disappointment to 
most people interested in the matter, I can only add that it is 
hardly less so to myself. It is a constant surprise — if one 
may so say — that the work does not get on faster. 
Of course the undertaking has become more and more formidable 
with the enlargement of geographical boundaries and 
of the number of species discovered. As to the increase in 
the number of species to be treated, we have by no means yet 
reached the end. The area, that of our continent down to the 
Mexican line, we trust is definitely fixed, at least for our day. 
And since we cannot be rid of the peninsula and keys of Florida, 
which entails upon us a considerable number of tropical 
species, mostly belonging to the West Indies — the southern 
boundary is now as natural a one as we can have. 
The area which Pursh's Flora covered was, we may say, the 
United States east of the Mississippi, with Canada to Labra- 
dor, to which was added a couple of hundred of species known 
to him outside these limits northwestward. 
Torrey and Gray's Flora took the initiative in annexing 
Texas, ten years before its political incorporation into the 
Union ; although the only plants we then possessed from it 
were certain portions of Drummond's collections. California 
was also annexed at the same time, on account of Douglas's 
collections, and those of Nuttall, who had just returned from 
his visit to the western coast, which he reached by a tedious 
journey across the continent over ground in good part new to 
the botanist. Douglas had already made remarkably full 
collections along a more northern line. The British arctic 
explorers, both by sea and land, had well developed the botany 
of the boreal regions, and Sir William Hooker was bringing 
out the results in his Flora of British America. Of 
course our knowledge of the whole interi6r and western region 
was small indeed, compared with the present ; and the 
botany of a vast region from the "western part of Texas to the 
Californian coast was absolutely unknown, and so remained 
until after the publication of the Flora was suspended. 
As to the number of species which Torrey and Gray had to 
deal with, I can only say that a rapid count gives us for the 
first volume about 2200 Folypetaloe ; that there are one hundred 
and nine species in the small orders which in the second 
volume precede the Compositce, ; and that there are of the 
Compositce 1054. So one may fairly conclude that if the 
work had been pushed on to completion, say in the year 1850, 
the 3076 species of Pursh's Flora in the year 1814 might have 
been just about doubled. Probably more rather than less ; for 
if we reckon from the number of the Compositce, and on the 
estimate that they constitute one-eighth of the phsenogamous 
plants of North America, instead of 6150, there would have 
been 8430 species known in the year specified. 
It most concerns us to know the number of species which, 
after the lapse of thirty years more — years in which exploration 
has been active, and has left no considerable part of our 
great area wholly unvisited — the now revived Flora has to 
deal with. We can make an estimate which cannot be far 
wrong. In the year 1878, my colleague, Mr. Watson, 
finished and published his " Bibliographical Index to the 
Polypetalae of North America," covering, that is, the same 
ground as the first volume of Torrey and Gray's Flora, completed 
in 1840. In it the 2200 species of the latter date are 
increased to 3038. The " Gamopetalce after Compositce "in 
the " Synoptical Flora," brought out in the same year, contains 
1656 species. The two together must make up half of 
our phsenogamous botany, that is, adding the increase of the 
last four years, about 5000 species. And so Mr. Watson 
adopts the estimate of 10,000 species of our known Phaenogams 
and Ferns. My impression is that the species of Compositce 
have increased at a rate which, unless they exceed the 
eight part of our Phaenogams, will warrant a still higher estimate. 
The number of introduced species of various orders, 
which will have to be enumerated and most of them described, 
is, unhappily, fast increasing ;1; 1 and new indigenous species 
are almost daily coming to us from some part or other of our 
wide territory. So that the 10,000 species of this estimate 
may before long rise to eleven or twelve thousand. Only the 
experienced botanist can form a just idea of what is involved 
in the accurate discrimination and proper coordination of 
10,000 to 12,000 species, and in the putting of the results into 
the language and form which may make our knowledge available 
to learners or to succeeding botanists. 
Moreover, there is of late an embarras des richesses which 
is becoming serious as respects labor and time. The continued 
and ever increasing influx of material to Cambridge, 
beneficial as it ever is, is accountable for this retardation of 
progress in a greater degree than almost any one would suppose. 
The herbarium, upon whose materials this work is 
mainly done, and which has been, like the Temple, full forty 
and six years in building, has received the contributions of 
two generations of botanists, and the Torrey herbarium goes 
back one generation farther. Still the number of American 
1 I say " unhappily," for they adulterate the natural character of our 
flora, and raise difficult questions as to how much of introduction and 
settlement should give to these denizens the rights of adopted citizens. 
specimens annually coming to it is greater than in most former 
years. Apart from the mere selection and care of these, 
consider how in other ways it affects the rate of progress of 
the Flora. The incoming of additional specimens may at a 
glance settle doubt as to the validity of a species ; but new 
specimens are as apt to raise questions as to settle them ; more 
commonly they raise the question as to the limitation and 
right definition of the species concerned, not rarely, also, that 
of their validity. When one has only single specimens of related 
species, the case may seem clear and the definition easy. 
The acquisition of a few more, from a different region or 
grown under different conditions, almost always calls for some 
reconsideration, not rarely for reconstruction. People generally 
suppose that species, and even genera, are like coin from 
the mint, or bank notes from the printing press, each with its 
fixed marks and signature, which he that runs may read, or 
the practised eye infallibly determine. But in fact species 
are judgments — judgments of variable value, and often very 
fallible judgments, as we botanists well know. And genera 
are more obviously judgments, and more and more liable to 
be affected by new discoveries. Judgments formed to-day — 
perhaps with full confidence, perhaps with misgiving — may 
to-morrow, with the discovery of new materials or the detection 
of some before unobserved point of structure, have to be 
weighed and decided anew. You see how all this bears upon 
the question of time and labor in the preparation of the Flora 
of a great country. If even in Old Europe the work has to 
be done over and over, how much more so in America, where 
new plants are almost daily coming to hand. It is true that 
these fall into their ranks, or are adjustable into their proper 
or probable places, but not without painstaking and tedious 
examination. 
Of our Flora, it may indeed be said, that " If it were done, 
when 't is done, then 't were well it were done quickly." 
But I may have made it clear that, in the actual state of the 
case, it is likely to be done slowly. At least you will understand 
why thus far it has been done slowly. As to the future, 
if it depended wholly upon me, the completion would obvi- 
ously be hopeless. I need not say that our dependence, for 
the actual elaboration, must largely be upon associates, upon 
the few who have the training and the vast patience, and the 
access to herbaria and libraries, requisite for this kind of 
work, but above all upon my associate in the herbarium at 
Cambridge, to whom, being present with us, I will not further 
allude. 
Of course we rely, very much indeed, upon the continued 
cooperation of all the cultivators of botany in the country ; 
and it is gratifying to know that their number is increasing, 
new ones not less zealous than the old, and better equipped, 
are taking the place of those that have passed away, and some 
of them extending their exploration over the remotest parts 
of the land, and into districts where there is most to be discovered. 
All can help on the work, and all are doing so, 
by communication of specimens and of observations. Those 
within the range of the published Manuals and Floras get 
on — or should get on — with only occasional help from us. 
They should send us notes and specimens to any amount ; but 
they should not ask us to stop to examine and name their 
plants, except in special cases, which we are always ready 
enough to take up. Those who collect in regions as yet destitute 
of such advantages may claim more aid, and we take 
great pains to render it : partly on our own account, that we 
may assort their contributions into their proper places, partly 
for the encouragement of such correspondents, who otherwise 
would not know what they have obtained, and who naturally 
like to know when they have made interesting discoveries. 
But the scattered and piecemeal study of plants is neither 
very satisfactory nor safe. And it involves great loss of time, 
besides interrupting that continuity and concentration of attention 
which the proper study of any group of plants demands. 
As respects the orders of plants which are yet to be 
elaborated for the Flora, and as to plants which require critical 
study or minute examination, necessarily consuminc much 
time, it is better to defer their complete determination until 
the groups to which they severally belong are regularly taken 
in hand. 
ESS A YS. 
256 
The cooperation of all our botanical associates is solicited 
in this regard, as a matter of common interest and advantage. 
For we are all equally concerned in forwarding the progress 
of the Flora of North America ; and we may confidently expect 
from our botanical associates their sympathy, their forbearance, 
and their continued aid. 
GENDER OF NAMES OF VARIETIES. 
Among other subordinate questions in Natural-history 
nomenclature, it has been asked whether names of varieties, 
like those of species, should conform in gender to the genus, 
or whether they may not as well conform to the word varietas, 
and so always be feminine. 
Linnaeus introduced the current practice of numbering varieties 
by the letters of the Greek alphabet a, B, y, etc. But 
to some varieties, evidently to the more important, he gave 
names. These names, when adjectives, were always (so far 
as we know) made to agree in gender with the generic name, 
e. g. : Viburnun Opidus, 8 roseum. Asparagus officinalis, 
a maritimus, B altilis. Mesembryanthemum ringers, a canium, 
Bfelinum. 
In our days named varieties play a more and more important 
part ; and all botanists, as a rule, appear to have followed 
the Linnean model, with now and then a divergence which is 
readily explained, and which may be said to be accidental, 
such as Ripogonum album., var. leptostachya, Benth. 
This is as one writes " form a albiflora " or " var. albiflora," 
a white-flowered form or variety. But that this is not 
the pattern nor the true construction of varietal names appears 
at once on reference to ordinary cases. Thus, for example, 
in " Nasturium amphibium, a indivisum, DC. Syst.," it is not 
an individual variety of the species that is meant, but a name 
which stands in the same grammatical relation to Nasturtium 
that amphibium does, and to write JV. amphibium, a indivisa, 
is obviously wrong. We should say that it makes no difference 
whether the word variety, or its abbreviation var. is 
expressed or understood. When the conditions of the case 
seem to call for it, we should write N. amphibium, var. a indivisum, 
just as, if it were ever needful, we might write 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxvii. 396. (1884.) 
" Nasturtium, spec, amphibium," and just as L. C. Richard 
(a good model), in Michaux's Flora writes, Viburnum, dentatum, 
var. a glabellum, 8 semi-tomentosum. Rhus Toxicodendron, 
var. a vulgare, ji quercifolium. 
The editor of the " Gardener's Chronicle " (March 22, p. 
373), having put this kind of question to M. Alphonse De 
Candolle (whom we should consider the highest living authority 
upon nomenclatural matters), understands him to 
reply that " the insertion of the abbreviation var. for varietas, 
which is feminine, demands a feminine termination; but if 
the word var. be omitted, then the rule would be for the variety 
to follow the specific name ; " — meaning probably the 
o-eneric name, for in one of the examples given, Thymus 
Serpyllum,, (3 montanus, it does not follow the specific. 
From this point of view, namely : that where the nature of 
the group (in this case variety) is expressed, the adjective 
name should be feminine, but where only understood, it 
might be masculine or neuter — we must commend the editor's 
closing remark : — 
"Perhaps the simplest and most easily recollected rule 
would be to make the varietal name feminine in all cases, 
whether the var. of varietas, were expressed, or understood. 
This at least would be intelligible, and would conduce to uniformity 
of practice." 
It would also be logical, and the logic also would require 
all specific names to be feminine ; for the word understood, 
species, is feminine. 
Now we do not suppose that M. De Candolle would tolerate 
a double set of genders for the names of varieties. His doctrine 
is that the "var." should be discarded and the Greek 
letters only employed, not only for numbering the varieties, 
but for designating the fact that the name they are prefixed 
to is a variety. 
It is not difficult to perceive why it has come to pass that 
" English writers generally use the abbreviation var.," and 
that some continental botanical writers follow the practice. 
One reason is, that it enables us to cite an author's variety by 
its name without having to concern ourselves with its Greek 
number, whether it is /3 or y or 8, which otherwise we should 
have to attend to. Another is, that our sense of good form 
revolts at beginning sentences and paragraps without capitals 
In our books, varieties usually stand in independent paragraphs. 
Even in Latin we do not like to begin a paragraph 
— 
" a indivisum foliis omnibus integerrimis serratisve, non 
aut vix basi auriculatis." 
In English we can still less abide it. So we prefix " Var.," 
and either number our varieties with Greek letters or, preferentially, 
leave them out. 
But, we did not suppose that by the employment of the 
word " var. " we had interfered with the relation of the name 
of the variety to that of its genus. Var. indivisum, in this 
case, we should construe the phrase : " Varietas cujus nomen 
est indivisum. ' Var. indivisum ' stands on the same ground 
as ' species amphibium.' " The latter rank we rarely need to 
express, because we always prefix the generic name or its initial. 
The former may often come in a shape which renders 
the designating prefix "var. " necessary, or at least most convenient. 

We may indeed, quite correctly write, var. albiflora, a white 
flowered variety, var. longifolia, a long-leaved variety ; but 
that is not according to the Linnean pattern nor to the regular 
practice, nor to the strict analogy of the varietal name 
with the specific. 
Moreover, if the gender of the word which designates the 
grade of the name is to govern the gender of the name, at 
least when expressed, as by var., then all subspecies must be 
made feminine. Now this term subspecies is coming largely 
into use. And it has to be expressed in every case, in this 
wise : Ranunculus aquatilis, L. Subsp. heterophyllus. Subsp. 
hederaceus, etc. 
If the proposition which we deprecate is adopted, these 
names would have to be written heterophylla and hederacea 
by an author who ranked them as subspecies but heterophyllus 
and hederaceus by one who took them as varieties and 
simply numbered them by Greek letters. Obviously the 
propositions in the " Gardener's Chronicle " has not been 
thoroughly worked out. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN 
FLORA. 
When the British Association, with much painstaking, 
honors and gratifies the cultivators of science on this side of 
the ocean by meeting on American soil, it is but seemly that 
a corresponding member for the third of a century should 
endeavor to manifest his interest in the occasion and to render 
some service, if he can, to his fellow-naturalists in Section D. 
I would attempt to do so by pointing out, in a general way, 
some of the characteristic features of the vegetation of the 
country which they have come to visit, — a country of " magnificent 
distances," but of which some vistas may be had by 
those who can use the facilities which are offered for enjoying 
them. Even to those who cannot command the time for distant 
excursions, and to some who may know little or nothing 
of botany, the sketch which I offer may not be altogether uninteresting. 
But I naturally address myself to the botanists 
of the Association, to those who, having crossed the wide Atlantic, 
are now invited to proceed westward over an almost 
• equal breadth of land ; some, indeed, have already journeyed 
to the Pacific coast, and have returned ; and not a few, it is 
hoped, may accept the invitation to Philadelphia, where a 
warm welcome awaits them — warmth of hospitality, rather 
than of summer temperature, let us hope ; but Philadelphia is 
proverbial for both. There opportunities may be afforded for 
a passing acquaintance with the botany of the Atlantic border 
of the United States, in company with the botanists of the 
American Association, who are expected to muster in full 
force. 
What may be asked of me, then, is to portray certain out- 
1 aVn Address to the Botanists of the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science at Montreal ; read to the Biological Section, August 
29, 1884. (American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxviii. 
323.) 
lines of the vegetation of the United States and the Canadian 
Dominion, as contrasted with that of Europe ; perhaps also to 
touch upon the causes or anterior conditions to which much 
of the actual differences between the two floras may be ascribed. 
For, indeed, however interesting or curious the facts 
of the case may be in themselves, they become far more instructive 
when we attain to some clear conception of the dependent 
relation of the present vegetation to a preceding state 
of things, out of which it has come. 
As to the Atlantic border on which we stand, probably the 
first impression made upon the botanist or other observer coming 
from Great Britain to New England or Canadian shores, 
will be the similarity of what he here finds with what he left 
behind. Among the trees the White Birch and the Chestnut 
will be identified, if not as exactly the same, yet with only 
slight differences — differences which may be said to be no 
more essential or profound than those in accent and intonation 
between the British speech and that of the " Americans." 
The differences between the Beeches and Larches of the two 
countries are a little more accentuated ; and still more those 
of the Hornbeams, Elms, and the nearest resembling Oaks. 
And so of several other trees. Only as you proceed westward 
and southward will the differences overpower the similarities, 
which still are met with. 
In the fields and along open roadsides the likeness seems 
to be greater. But much of this likeness is the unconscious 
work of man, rather than of Nature, the reason of which is 
not far to seek. This was a region of forest, upon which the 
aborigines, although they here and there opened patches of 
land for cultivation, had made no permanent encroachment. 
Not very much of the herbaceous or other low undergrowth 
of this forest could bear exposure to the fervid summer's sun ; 
and the change was too abrupt for adaptive modification. The 
plains and prairies of the great Mississippi Valley were then 
too remote for their vegetation to compete for the vacancy 
which was made here when forest was changed to grain-fields 
and then to meadow and pasture. And so the vacancy came 
to be filled in a notable measure by agrestial plants from Eu- 
rope, the seeds of which came in seed-grain, in the coats and 
fleece and in the imported fodder of cattle and sheep, and in 
the various but not always apparent ways in which agricultural 
and commercial people unwittingly convey the plants 
and animals of one country to another. So, while an agricultural 
people displaced the aborigines which the forests sheltered 
and nourished, the herbs, purposely or accidentally 
brought with them, took possession of the clearings, and prevailed 
more or less over the native and rightful heirs to the 
soil, — not enough to supplant them, indeed, but enough to 
impart a certain adventitious Old World aspect to the fields 
and other open grounds, as well as to the precincts of habitations. 
In spring-time you would have seen the fields of this 
district yellow with European Buttercups and Dandelions, 
then whitened with the Ox-eye Daisy, and at midsummer 
brightened by the cerulean blue of Chicory. I can hardly 
name any native herbs which in the fields and at the season 
can vie with these intruders in floral show. The common 
Barberry of the Old World is an early denizen of New England. 
The tall Mullein, of a wholly alien race, shoots up in 
every pasture and new clearing, accompanied by the common 
Thistle, while another imported Thistle, called in the United 
States " the Canada Thistle," has become a veritable nuisance, 
at which much legislation has been leveled in vain. 
According to tradition the wayside Plantain was called by 
the American Indian "White-Man's foot," from its springing 
up wherever that foot had been planted. But there is some 
reason for suspecting that the Indian's ancestors brought it to 
this continent. Moreover there is another reason for surmising 
that this long-accepted tradition is fictitious. For there 
was already in the country a native Plantain, so like Plantago 
major that the botanists have only of late distinguished it. (I 
acknowledge my share in the oversight.) Possibly, although 
the botanists were at fault, the aborigines may have known 
the difference. The cows are said to know it. For a brother 
botanist of long experience tells me that, where the two grow 
together, cows freely feed upon the undoubtedly native species, 
and leave the naturalized one untouched. 
It has been maintained that the ruderal and agrestial Old 
World plants and weeds of cultivation displace the indigenous 
ones of newly settled countries in virtue of a strength which 
they have developed through survival in the struggle of ages, 
under the severe competition incident to their former migrations. 
And it does seem that most of the pertinacious weeds 
of the Old World which have been given to us may not be 
indigenous even to Europe, at least to western Europe, but 
belong to campestrine or unwooded regions farther east ; and 
that, following the movements of pastoral and agricultural 
people, they may have played somewhat the same part in the 
once forest-clad western Europe that they have been playing 
here. But it is unnecessary to build much upon the possibly 
fallacious idea of increased strength gained by competition. 
Opportunity may count for more than exceptional vigor ; and 
the cases in which foreign plants have shown such superiority 
are mainly those in which a forest-destroying people have 
brought upon newly-bared soil the seeds of an open-ground 
vegetation. 
The one marked exception that I know of, the case of recent 
and abundant influx of this class of Old World plants into a 
naturally treeless region, supports the same conclusion. Our 
associate, Mr. John Ball, has recently called attention to it. 
The pampas of southeastern South America beyond the Rio 
Colorado, lying between the same parallels of latitude in the 
south as Montreal and Philadelphia in the north, and with 
climate and probably soils fit to sustain a varied vegetation, 
and even a fair proportion of forest, are not only treeless, but 
excessively poor in their herbaceous flora. The district has 
had no trees since its comparatively recent elevation from the 
sea. As Mr. Darwin long ago intimated : " Trees are absent 
not because they cannot grow and thrive, but because the only 
country from which they could have been derived — tropical 
and sub-tropical South America — could not supply species to 
suit the soil and climate." And as to the herbaceous and 
frutescent species, to continue the extract from Mr. Ball's instructive 
paper recently published in the Linnaean Society's 
Journal, "in a district raised from the sea during the latest 
geological period, and bounded on the west by a great mountain 
range mainly clothed with an alpine flora requiring the 
protection of snow in winter, and on the north by a warmtemperate 
region whose flora is mainly of modified sub-tropical 
origin — the only plants that could occupy the newly-formed 
region were the comparatively few which, though developed 
under very different conditions, were sufficiently tolerant of 
change to adapt themselves to the new environment. The 
flora is poor, not because the land cannot support a richer one, 
but because the only regions from which a large population 
could be derived are inhabited by races unfit for emigration." 
Singularly enough, this deficiency of herbaceous plants is 
being supplied from Europe, and the incomers are spreading 
with great rapidity ; for lack of other forest material even 
Apple-trees are running wild and forming extensive groves. 
Men and cattle are, as usual, the agents of dissemination. 
But colonizing plants are filling, in this instance, a vacancy 
which was left by nature, while ours was made by man. We 
may agree with Mr. Ball in the opinion that the rapidity with 
which the intrusive plants have spread in this part of South 
America " is to be accounted for, less by any special fitness 
of the immigrant species, than by the fact that the ground is 
to a great extent unoccupied." 
The principle applies here also ; and in general, that it is 
opportunity rather than specially acquired vigor that has 
given Old World weeds an advantage may be inferred from 
the behavior of our weeds indigenous to the country, the 
plants of the unwooded districts — prairies or savannas west 
and south, — which, now that the way is open, are coming in 
one by one into these eastern parts, extending their area continually, 
and holding their ground quite as pertinaciously as 
the immigrant denizens. Almost every year gives new examples 
of the immigration of campestrine western plants into 
the eastern States. They are well up to the spirit of the 
age; they travel by railway. The seeds are transported, 
some in the coats of cattle and sheep on the way to market, 
others in the food which supports them on the journey, and 
many in a way which you might not suspect, until you 
consider that these great roads run east and west, that the 
prevalent winds are from the west, that a freight-train left 
unguarded was not long ago blown on for more than one 
hundred miles before it could be stopped, not altogether on 
down grades, and that the bared and mostly unkempt borders 
of these railways form capital seed-beds and nursery-ground 
for such plants. 
Returning now from this side issue, let me advert to another 
and, I judge, a very pleasant experience which the botanist 
and the cultivator may have on first visiting the American 
shores. At almost every step he comes upon old acquaintances, 
upon shrubs and trees and flowering herbs, mostly peculiar to 
this country, but with which he is familiar in the grounds and 
gardens of his home. Great Britain is especially hospitable 
to American trees and shrubs. There those both of the eastern 
and western sides of our continent flourish side by side. 
Here they almost wholly refuse such association. But the 
most familiar and longest-established representatives of our 
flora (certain western annuals excepted) were drawn from the 
Atlantic coast. Among them are the Virginia Creeper or 
Ampelopsis, almost as commonly grown in Europe as here, 
and which, I think, displays its autumnal crimson as brightly 
there as along the borders of its native woods where you will 
everywhere meet with it ; the Red and Sugar Maples, which 
give the notable autumnal glow to our northern woods, but 
rarely make much show in Europe, perhaps for lack of sharp 
contrast between summer and autumn ; the ornamental Ericaceous 
shrubs, Kalmias, Azaleas, Rhododendrons, and the 
like, specially called American plants in England, although 
all the Rhododendrons of the finer sort are half Asiatic, the 
hardy American species having been crossed and recrossed 
with more elegant but tender Indian species. 
As to flowering herbs, somewhat of the delight with which 
an American first gathers wild Primroses and Cowslips and 
Foxgloves and Daisies in Europe, may be enjoyed by the 
European botanist when he comes upon our Trilliums and 
Sanguinaria, Cypripediums and Dodecatheon, our species of 
Phlox, Coreopsis, etc., so familiar in his gardens ; or when, 
crossing the continent, he comes upon large tracts of ground 
yellow with Eschscholtzia or blue with Nemophilas. But 
with a sentimental difference ; in that Primroses, Daisies, and 
Heaths, like nightingales and larks, are inwrought into our 
common literature and poetry, whereas our native flowers and 
birds, if not altogether unsung, have attained at the most to 
only local celebrity. 
Turning now from similarities, and from that which interchange 
has made familiar, to that which is different or 
peculiar, I suppose that an observant botanist upon a survey 
of the Atlantic border of North America (which naturally 
first and mainly attracts our attention) would be impressed 
by the comparative wealth of this flora in trees and shrubs. 
Not so much so in the Canadian Dominion, at least in its 
eastern part ; but even here the difference will be striking 
enough on comparing Canada with Great Britain. 
The Coniferm, native to the British Islands, are one Pine, 
one Juniper, and a Yew ; those of Canada proper are four or 
five Pines, four Firs, a Larch, an Arbor-Vitae, three Junipers, 
and a Yew, fourteen or fifteen to three. Of Amentaceous 
trees and shrubs, Great Britain counts one Oak (in two 
marked forms), a Beech, a Hazel, a Hornbeam, two Birches, 
an Alder, a Myrica, eighteen Willows, and two Poplars, — 
twenty-eight species in nine genera, and under four natural 
orders. In Canada there are at least eight Oaks, a Chestnut, 
a Beech, two Hazels, two Hornbeams of distinct genera, six 
Birches, two Alders, about fourteen Willows and five Poplars, 
also a Plane tree, two Walnuts and four Hickories ; say fortyeight 
species, in thirteen genera, and belonging to seven 
natural orders. The comparison may not be altogether fair ; 
for the British flora is exceptionally poor, even for islands so 
situated. But if we extend it to Scandinavia, so as to have 
a continental and an equivalent area, the native Coniferm 
would be augmented only by one Fir, the Amentacece by several 
more Willows, a Poplar, and one or two more Birches ; 
no additional orders nor genera. 
If we take in the Atlantic United States east of the Mississippi, 
and compare this area with Europe, we should find 
the species and the types increasing as we proceed southward, 
but about the same numerical proportion would hold. 
But, more interesting than this numerical preponderance — 
which is practically confined to the trees and shrubs — will 
be the extra-European types, which, intermixed with familiar 
Old-World forms, give peculiar features to the North American 
flora, — - features discernible in Canada, but more and 
more prominent as we proceed southward. Still confining 
our survey to the Atlantic district, that is, without crossing 
the Mississippi, the following are among the notable points : 
1. Leguminous Trees of peculiar types. Europe abounds 
in leguminous shrubs or under-shrubs, mostly of the Genisteous 
tribe, which is wanting in all North America, but has no 
Leguminous tree of more pretence than the Cercis and Laburnum. 
Our Atlantic forest is distinguished by a Cercis of its 
own, three species of Locust, two of them fine trees, and two 
Honey Locusts, the beautiful Cladrastis, and the stately Gymnocladus. 
Only the Cercis has any European relationship. 
For relatives of the others we must look to the Chino-Japanese 
region. 
2. The great development of the Ericacece (taking the 
order in its widest sense), along with the absence of the Ericeous 
tribe, that is, of the Heaths themselves. We possess on 
this side of the Mississippi thirty genera, and not far from 
ninety species. All Europe has only seventeen genera and 
barely fifty species. We have most of the actual European 
species, excepting their Rhododendrons and their Heaths, — 
and even the latter are represented by some scattered patches 
of Calluna, of which it may be still doubtful whether they are 
chance introductions or sparse and scanty survivals ; and 
besides we have a wealth of peculiar genera and species. 
Among them the most notable in an ornamental point of 
view are the Rhododendrons, Azaleas, Kalmias, Andromedas, 
and Clethras ; in botanical interest, the endemic Monotropeoe, 
of which there is only one species in Europe, but seven genera 
in North America, all but one absolutely peculiar; and in 
edible as well as botanical interest, the unexampled development 
and diversification of the genus Vaccinium (along with 
the allied American type, Gaylussacia) will attract attention. 
It is interesting to note the rapid falling away of Ericaceae 
westward in the valley of the Mississippi as the forest thins 
out. 
3. The wealth of this flora in Compositce, is a most obvious 
feature ; one especially prominent at this season of the year, 
when the open grounds are becoming golden with Solidago, 
and the earlier of the autumnal Asters are beginning to blossom. 
The Compositce form the largest order of Phaenogamous 
plants in all temperate floras of the northern hemisphere, are 
well up to the average in Europe, but are nowhere so numerous 
as in North America, where they form an eighth part of 
the whole. But the contrast between the Compositce of 
Europe and Atlantic North America is striking. Europe 
runs to Thistles, to Pnuloidece, to Anthemidece, and to Cichoriacece. 
It has very few Asters, and only two Solidagoes, no 
Sunflowers, and hardly anything of that tribe. Our Atlantic 
flora surpasses all the world in Asters and Solidagoes, as also 
in Sunflowers and their various allies, is rich in Eupatoriacea;., 
of which Europe has extremely few, and is well supplied with 
Vernoniacece and PPelenioidece, of which she has none ; but is 
scanty in all the groups that predominate in Europe. I may 
remark that if our larger and most troublesome genera, such 
as Solidago and Aster, were treated in our systematic works 
even in the way that Nyman has treated Hieracium in Europe, 
the species of these two genera (now numbering seventy-eight 
and one hundred and twenty-four respectively) would be at 
least doubled. 
4. Perhaps the most interesting contrast between the flora 
of Europe and that of the eastern border of North America 
is in the number of generic and even ordinal types here met 
with which are wholly absent from Europe. Possibly we may 
distinguish these into two sets of differing history. One will 
represent a tropical element, more or less transformed, which 
has probably acquired or been able to hold its position so far 
north in virtue of our high summer temperature. (In this 
whole survey the peninsula of Florida is left out of view, regarding 
its botany as essentially Bahaman and Cuban, with a 
certain admixture of northern elements.) To the first type I 
refer such trees and shrubs as Asimina, sole representative of 
the Anonacece out of the tropics, and reaching even to lat. 42° ; 
Chrysobalanus, representing a tropical suborder ; Pinckneya, 
representing as far north as Georgia the Cinchoneous tribe ; 
the Baccharis of our coast, reaching even to New England ; 
Cyrilla and Cliftonia, the former actually West Indian ; 
Bumelia, representing the tropical order Sapotacem ; Bignonia 
and Tecoma of the Bignoniacece ; Forestiera in Oleacece; 
Persea of the Laurinece ; and finally the Cactacece. 
Among the herbaceous plants of this set I will allude only to 
some of peculiar orders. Among them I reckon Sarracenia, 
of which the only extra -North American representative is 
tropical- American, the Melastomacece, represented by Rhexia ; 
Passiflora (our species being herbaceous), a few representatives 
of Loasacece and Turneracece, also of Plydrophyllacece ; 
our two genera of Bwmanniacece ; three genera of Hcemodoracece 
; Tillandsia in Bromeliacece ; two genera of Pontederiacece 
; two of Commelynaccm ; the outlying Mayaca and 
Xyris, and three genera of Eriocaulonacece. Ido not forget 
that one of our species of Eriocaulon occurs on the west coast 
of Ireland and in Skye, wonderfully out of place, though on 
this side of the Atlantic it reaches Newfoundland. It may be 
a survival in the Old World ; but it is more probably of 
chance introduction. 
The other set of extra-European types, characteristic of the 
Atlantic North American flora, is very notable. According to 
a view which I have much and for a long while insisted on, it 
may be said to represent a certain portion of the once rather 
uniform flora of the arctic and less boreal zone, from the late 
Tertiary down to the incoming of the Glacial period, and 
which, brought down to our lower latitudes by the gradual 
refrigeration, has been preserved here in eastern North 
America and in the corresponding parts of Asia, but was lost 
to Europe. I need not recapitulate the evidence upon which 
this now generally accepted doctrine was founded; and to 
enumerate the plants which testify in its favor would amount 
to an enumeration of the greater part of the genera or sub- 
ordinate groups of plants which distinguish our Atlantic flora 
from that of Europe. The evidence, in brief, is that the 
plants in question, or their moderately differentiated representatives, 
still coexist in the flora of eastern North America 
and that of the Chino-Japanese region, the climates and conditions 
of which are very similar ; and that the fossilized representatives 
of many of them have been brought to light in 
the late tertiary deposits of the arctic zone wherever explored. 
In mentioning some of the plants of this category I include 
the Magnolias, although there are no nearly identical species, 
but there is a seemingly identical Liriodendron in China, and 
the Schizandras and Illiciums are divided between the two 
floras ; and I put into the list Menispermum, of which the 
only other species is eastern Siberian, and is hardly distinguishable 
from ours. When you call to mind the series of 
wholly extra-European types which are identically or approximately 
represented in the eastern North American and in the 
eastern Asiatic temperate floras, such as Trautvetteria and 
Hydrastis in Ranunculacece ; Caulophyllum, Diphylleia, 
Jeffersonia and Podophyllum in Berberidece ; Brasenia and 
Nelumbium in PYymphceaccce ; Stylophorum in Papaveracem ; 
Stuartia and Gordonia in Ternstroemiaceai ; the equivalent 
species of Xanthoxylum, the equivalent and identical species 
of Vitis, and of the poisonous species of Rhus (one, if not 
both, of which you may meet with in every botanical excursion, 
and which it will be safer not to handle) ; the Horsechestnuts, 
here called Buckeyes ; the Negundo, a peculiar offshoot 
of the Maple tribe ; when you consider that almost 
every one of the peculiar Leguminous tree mentioned as 
characteristic of our flora is represented by a species in China 
or Mandchuria or Japan, and so of some herbaceous Pjeguminosw,; 
when you remember that the peculiar small order of 
which Calycanthus is the principal type has its other representative 
in the same region ; that the species of Philadelphus, 
of Hydrangea, of Itea, Astilbe, Hamamelis, Diervilla, Triosteum, 
Mitchella which carpets the ground under evergreen 
woods, Chiogenes, creeping over the shaded bogs ; Epigsea, 
choicest woodland flower of early spring ; Elliottia ; Shortia 
(the curious history of which I need not rehearse) ; Styrax of 
cognate species ; Nyssa, the Asiatic representatives of which 
affect a warmer region ; Gelsemium, which under the name 
of Jessamine is the vernal pride of the southern Atlantic 
States; Pyrularia and Buckleya, peculiar Santalaceous shrubs ; 
Sassafras and Benzoins of the Laurel family ; Planera and 
Maclura ; Pachysandra of the Box tribe ; the great development 
of the Juglandacece (of which the sole representative 
in Europe probably was brought by man into southeastern 
Europe in pre-historio times) ; our Hemlock Spruces, Arbor- 
Vitse, Chamaecyparis, Taxodium, and Torreya, with their east 
Asian counterparts, the Roxburghiacece, represented by 
Croomia, — and I might much further extend and particularize 
the enumeration, — you will have enough to make it clear that 
the peculiarities of the one flora are the peculiarities of the 
other, and that the two are in striking contrast with the flora 
of Europe- 
This contrast is susceptible of explanation. I have ventured 
to regard the two antipodal floras thus compared as the 
favored heirs of the ante-glacial high-northern flora, or rather 
as the heirs who have retained most of their inheritance. 
For, inasmuch as the present arctic flora is essentially the 
same round the world, and the Tertiary fossil plants entombed 
in the strata beneath are also largely identical in all the longitudes, 
we may well infer that the ancestors of the present 
northern temperate plants were as widely distributed throughout 
their northern home. In their enforced migration southward, 
geographical configuration and climatic differences 
would begin to operate. Perhaps the way into Europe was 
less open than into the lower latitudes of America and eastern 
Asia, although there is reason to think that Greenland was 
joined to Scandinavia. However that be, we know that Europe 
was fairly well furnished with many of the vegetable types 
that are now absent, possibly with most of them. Those that 
have been recognized are mainly trees and shrubs, which 
somehow take most readily to fossilization, but the herbaceous 
vegetation probably accompanied the arboreal. At any rate, 
Europe then possessed Torreyas, and Gingkos, Taxodium and 
Glyptostrobus, Libocedrus, Pines of our five-leaved type, as 
well as the analogues of other American forms, several species 
of Juglans answering to the American forms, and the now 
peculiarly American genus Carya, Oaks of the American 
types, Myricas of the two American types, one or two Planertrees, 
species of Populus answering to our Cottonwoods and 
our Balsam-poplar, a Sassafras and the analogues of our Persea 
and Benzoin, a Catalpa, Magnolias, and a Liriodendron, 
Maples answering to ours, and also a Negundo, and such peculiarly 
American Leguminous genera as the Locust, Honey 
Locust, and Gymnocladus. To understand how Europe came 
to lose these elements of her flora, and Atlantic North America 
to retain them, we must recall the poverty of Europe in 
native forest trees, to which I have already alluded. A few 
years ago, in an article on this subject, I drew up a sketch of 
the relative richness of Europe, Atlantic North America, 
Pacific North America, and the eastern side of temperate Asia 
in genera and species of forest trees. 1 In that sketch, as I 
am now convinced, the European forest elements were somewhat 
underrated. I allowed only thirty-three genera and 
eighty-five species, while to our Atlantic American forest were 
assigned sixty-six genera and one hundred and fifty-five 
species. I find from Nyman's Conspectus that there are trees 
on the southern and eastern borders of Europe which I had 
omitted ; that there are good species which I had reckoned as 
synonyms, and some that may rise to arboreal height which I 
had counted as shrubs. But on the other hand and for the 
present purpose it may be rejoined that the list contained 
several trees, of as many genera, which were probably carried 
from Asia into Europe by the hand of man. On Nyman's 
authority I may put into this category Cercis Siliquastrum, 
Ceratonia Siliqua, Diospyros Lotus, Styrax officinalis, the 
Olive, and even the Walnut, the Chestnut, and the Cypress. 
However this may be, it seems clear that the native forest 
flora of Europe is exceptionally poor, and that it has lost 
many species and types which once belonged to it. We must 
suppose that the herbaceous flora has suffered in the same 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xvi. 85. 
way. I have endeavored to show how this has naturally come 
about. I cannot state it more concisely than in the terms 
which I used six years ago. 
" I conceive that three things have conspired to this loss of 
American, or as we might say, of normal types sustained by 
Europe. First, Europe, extending but little south of lat. 40°, 
is all within the limits of severe glacial action. Second, its 
mountains trend east and west, from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians 
and the Caucasus beyond : they had glaciers of 
their own, which must have begun their work and poured 
dowm the northward flanks while the plains were still covered 
with forest on the retreat from the great ice forces coming 
from the north. Attacked both on front and rear, much of 
the forest must have perished then and there. 
" Third, across the line of retreat of whatever trees may 
have flanked the mountain ranges, or were stationed south of 
them, stretched the Mediterranean, an impassable barrier. . . . 
Escape by the east, and rehabilitation from that quarter until 
a very late period, was apparently prevented by the prolongation 
of the Mediterranean to the Caspian, and probably 
thence to the Siberian Ocean. If we accept the supposition 
of Nordenskjold that, anterior to the Glacial period, Europe 
was ' bounded on the south by an ocean extending from the 
Atlantic over the present deserts of Sahara and Central Asia 
to the Pacific,' all chance of these American types having escaped 
from and reentered Europe from the south and east 
seems excluded. Europe may thus be conceived to have been 
for a time somewhat in the condition in which Greenland is 
now. . . . Greenland may be referred to as a country which, 
having undergone extreme glaciation, bears the marks of it in 
the extreme poverty of its flora, and in the absence of the 
plants to which its southern portion, extending six degrees 
below the arctic circle, might be entitled. It ought to have 
trees and it might support them. But since their destruction 
by glaciation no way has been open for their return. Europe 
fared much better, but has suffered in its degree in a similar 
way." 
Turning to this country for a contrast, we find the conti- 
nent on the eastern side unbroken and open from the arctic 
circle to the tropic, and the mountains running north and 
south. The vegetation when pressed on the north by oncoming 
refrigeration had only to move its southern border 
southward to enjoy its normal climate over a favorable region 
of great extent ; and, upon the recession of glaciation to the 
present limit, or in the oscillations which intervened, there 
was no physical impediment to the adjustment. Then, too, 
the more southern latitude of this country gave great advantage 
over Europe. The line of terminal moraines, which 
marks the limit of glaciation, rarely passes the parallel of 40° 
or 39°. Nor have any violent changes occurred here, as they 
have on the Pacific side of the continent, within the period 
under question. So, while Europe was suffering hardship, 
the lines of our Atlantic American flora were cast in pleasant 
places, and the goodly heritage remains essentially unimpaired. 

The transverse direction and the massiveness of the mountains 
of Europe, while they have in part determined the comparative 
poverty of its forest-vegetation, have preserved there 
a rich and widely distributed alpine flora. That of Atlantic 
North America is insignificant. It consists of a few arctic 
plants, left scattered upon narrow and scattered mountaintops, 
or in cool ravines of moderate elevation ; the maximum 
altitude is only about 6000 feet in lat. 44°, on the White 
Mountains of New Hampshire, where no winter snow outlasts 
mid-summer. The best alpine stations are within easy reach 
of Montreal. But as almost every species is common to Europe, 
and the mountains are not magnificent, they offer no 
great attraction to a European botanist. 
Farther south, the Appalachian Mountains are higher, between 
lat. 36° and 34° rising considerably above 6000 feet ; 
they have botanical attractions of their own, but they have no 
alpine plants. A few sub-alpine species linger on the cool 
shores of Lake Superior, at a comparatively low level. Perhaps 
as many are found nearly at the level of the sea on Anticosti, 
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, abnormally cooled by the 
Labrador current. 
The chain of the great fresh-water lakes, which are discharged 
by the brimming St. Lawrence, seems to have little 
effect upon our botany, beyond the bringing down of a few 
northwestern species. But you may note with interest that 
they harbor sundry maritime species, mementoes of the former 
saltness of these interior seas. Cakile Americana, much 
like the European Sea Rocket, Hudsonia tomentosa (a peculiar 
Cistaceous genus imitating a Heath), Lathyrus maritimus, 
and Ammophila arenaria, are the principal. Salicornia, 
Glaux, Scirpus maritimus, Ranunculus Cymbalaria, 
and some others, may be associated with them. But these 
are widely diffused over the saline soil which characterizes 
the plains beyond our wooded region. 
I have thought that some general considerations like these 
might have more interest for the biological section at large 
than any particular indications of our most interesting plants, 
and of how and where the botanist might find them. Those 
who in these busy days can find time to herborize will be in 
the excellent hands of the Canadian botanists. At Philadelphia 
their brethren of the United States will be assembled to 
meet their visitors, and the Philadelphians will escort them to 
their classic ground, the Pine Barrens of New Jersey. To 
have an idea of this peculiar phytogeographical district, you 
may suppose a long wedge of the Carolina coast to be thrust 
up northward quite to New York harbor, bringing into a comparatively 
cool climate many of the interesting low-country 
plants of the south, which, at this season, you would not care 
to seek in their sultry proper homes. Years ago, when Pursh 
and Leconte and Torrey used to visit it, and in my own 
younger days, it was wholly primitive and upsoiled. Now, 
when the shore is lined with huge summer hotels, the Pitch 
Pines carried off for firewood, the bogs converted into Cranberry-grounds, 
and much of the light sandy or gravelly soil 
planted with wine-yards or converted into Melon and Sweetpotato 
patches, I fear it may have lost some of its botanical 
attractions. But large tracts are still nearly in a state of 
nature. Drosera, filiformis, so unlike any European species, 
and the beautiful Sabbatias, the yellow Fringed Orchis, 
Lachnanthes and Lophiola, the larger Xyrises and Eriocaulons, 
the curious grass Amphicarpum with cleistogamous 
flowers at the root, the showy species of Chrysopsis, and many 
others, must still abound. And every botanist will wish to 
collect Schizcea pusilla, rarest, most local, and among the 
smallest of Ferns. 
If only the season would allow it, there is a more southern 
station of special interest, — Wilmington, on the coast of 
North Carolina. Carnivorous plants have, of late years, excited 
the greatest interest, both popular and scientific ; and 
here, of all places, carnivorous plants seem to have their 
most varied development. For this is the only and the very 
local home of Dionaea; here grow almost all the North 
American species of Drosera ; here or near by are most of 
the species of Sarracenia, of the bladder-bearing Utricularias, 
— one of which the president of our Section has detected 
in fish-catching, — and also the largest species of Pinguicula. 
But at this season a more enjoyable excursion may be made 
to the southern portion of the Alleghany or Appalachian 
Mountains, which separate the waters of the Atlantic side 
from those of the Mississippi. These mountains are now 
easily reached from Philadelphia. In Pennsylvania, where 
they consist of parallel ridges without peaks or crests, and 
are of no great height, they are less interesting botanically 
than in Virginia ; but it is in North Carolina and the adjacent 
borders of Tennessee that they rise to their highest altitude 
and take on more picturesque forms. On their sides 
the Atlantic forest, especially its deciduous-leaved portion, is 
still to be seen to greatest advantage, nearly in pristine condition, 
and composed of a greater variety of genera and species 
than in any other temperate region, excepting Japan. 
And in their shade are the greatest variety and abundance of 
shrubs, and a good share of the most peculiar herbaceous 
genera. This is the special home of our Rhododendrons, 
Azaleas, and Kalmias ; at least here they flourish in greatest 
number and in most luxuriant growth. Rhododendron maximum 
(which is found in a scattered way even as far north as 
the vicinity of Montreal) and PPalmia latifolia (both called 
Laurels) even become forest trees in some places ; more commonly 
they are shrubs, forming dense thickets on steep mountain-sides, 
through which the traveler can make his way only 
by following old bear-paths, or by keeping strictly on the dividing 
crests of the leading ridges. 
Only on the summits do we find Rhododendron Catawbiense, 
parent of so many handsome forms in English 
grounds, and on the higher wooded slopes the yellow and the 
flame-colored Azalea calendulacea ; on the lower, the pink 
A. nudiflora and more showy A. arborescens, along with the 
common and widespread A. viscosa. The latter part of 
June is the proper time to explore this region, and, if only 
one portion can be visited, Roan Mountain should be preferred. 

On these mountain-tops we meet with a curious anomaly in 
geographical distribution. With rarest exceptions, plants 
which are common to this country and to Europe extend well 
northward. But on these summits from southern Virginia to 
Carolina, yet nowhere else, we find — undoubtedly indigenous 
and undoubtedly identical with the European species — 
the Lily-of-the-Valley ! 
I have given so much of my time to the botany of the Atlantic 
border that I can barely touch upon that of the western 
regions. 
Between the wooded country of the Atlantic side of the 
continent and that of the Pacific side lies a vast extent of 
plains which are essentially woodless, except where they are 
traversed by mountain-chains. The prairies of the Atlantic 
States bordering the Mississippi and of the Winnipeg country 
shade off into the drier and gradually more saline plains, which, 
with an even and gradual rise, attain an elevation of 5000 feet 
or more where they abut against the Rocky Mountains. Until 
these are reached (over a space from the Alleghanies westward 
of about twenty degrees of longitude) the plains are unbroken. 
To a moderate distance beyond the Mississippi the country 
must have been in the main naturally wooded. There is rainfall 
enough for forest on these actual prairies. Trees grow 
fairly well when planted ; they are coming up spontaneously 
under present opportunities ; and there is reason for thinking 
that all the prairies east of the Mississippi, and of the Missouri 
up to Minnesota, have been either greatly extended or 
were even made treeless under Indian occupation and annual 
burnings. These prairies are flowery with a good number of 
characteristic plants, many of them evidently derived from the 
plains farther west. At this season, the predominant vegetation 
is of Compositce, especially of Asters and Solidagoes, 
and of Sunflowers, Silphiums, and other Helianthoid Compositce. 

The drier and barer plains beyond, clothed with the short 
Buffalo-grasses, probably never bore trees in their present 
state, except as now some Cottonwoods (i. e. Poplars) on the 
margins of the long rivers which traverse them in their course 
from the Rocky Mountains to the Mississippi. Westward, the 
plains grow more and more saline ; and Wormwoods and Chenopodiacece 
of various sorts form the dominant vegetation, 
some of them sui generis or at least peculiar to the country, 
others identical or congeneric with those of the steppes of 
central Asia. Along with this common campestrine vegetation 
there is a large infusion of peculiar American types, 
which I suppose came from the southward, and to which I will 
again refer. 
Then come the Rocky Mountains, traversing the whole continent 
from north to south ; their flanks wooded, but not richly 
so, — chiefly with Pines and Firs of very few species, and with 
a single übiquitous Poplar, their higher crests bearing a welldeveloped 
alpine flora. This is the arctic flora prolonged southward 
upon the mountains of sufficient elevation, with a certain 
admixture in the lower latitudes of types pertaining to the 
lower vicinity. 
There are almost 200 alpine Phaenogamous species now 
known on the Rocky Mountains ; fully three-quarters of which 
are arctic, including Alaskan and Greenlandian ; and about 
half of them are known in Europe. Several others are north 
Asian but not European. Even in that northern portion of 
the Rocky Mountains which the Association is invited to 
visit, several alpine species novel to European botany may be 
met with ; and farther south the peculiar forms increase. On 
the other hand, it is interesting to note how many Old-World 
species extend their range southward even to lat. 36° or 35°. 
I have not seen the Rocky Mountains in the Dominion ; 
but I apprehend that the aspect and character of the forest is 
Canadian, is mainly coniferous, and composed of very few 
species. Oaks and other cupuliferous trees, which give character 
to the Atlantic forest, are entirely wanting, until the 
southern confines of the region are reached in Colorado and 
New Mexico, and there they are few and small. In these 
southern parts there is a lesser amount of forest, but a much 
greater diversity of genera and species ; of which the most 
notable are the Pines of the Mexican-plateau type. 
The Rocky Mountains and the coast ranges on the Pacific 
side so nearly approach in British America that their forests 
merge, and the eastern types are gradually replaced by the 
more peculiar western. But in the United States a broad, 
arid and treeless, and even truly desert region is interposed. 
This has its greatest breadth and is best known where it is 
traversed by the Central Pacific Railroad. It is an immense 
plain between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, 
largely a basin with no outlet to the sea, covered with Sagebrush 
(i. e. peculiar species of Artemisia) and other subsaline 
vegetation, all of grayish hue ; traversed, mostly north and 
south, by chains of mountains, which seem to be more bare 
than the plains, but which hold in their recesses a considerable 
amount of forest and of other vegetation, mostly of Rocky 
Mountains types. 
Desolate and desert as this region appears, it is far from 
uninteresting to the botanist ; but I must not stop to show 
how. Yet even the ardent botanist feels a sense of relief and 
exultation when, as he reaches the Sierra Nevada, he passes 
abruptly into perhaps the noblest coniferous forest in the 
world, — a forest which stretches along this range and its 
northern continuation, and along the less elevated ranges 
which border the Pacific coast, from the southern part of California 
to Alaska. 
So much has been said about this forest, about the two 
gigantic trees which have made it famous, and its Pines and 
Firs which are hardly less wonderful, and which in Oregon 
and British Columbia, descending into the plains, yield far 
more timber to the acre than can be found anywhere else, — I 
have myself discoursed upon the subject so largely on former 
occasions, that I may cut short all discourse upon the Pacificcoast 
flora and the questions it brings up. 
I note only these points. Although this flora is richer than 
that of the Atlantic in Coniflerce (having almost twice as many 
species), richer indeed than any other except that of eastern 
Asia, it is very meagre in deciduous trees. It has a fair number 
of Oaks, indeed, and it has a Flowering Dogwood, even 
more showy than that which brightens our eastern woodlands 
in spring. But, altogether it possesses only one-quarter of the 
number of species of deciduous trees that the Atlantic forest 
has ; it is even much poorer than Europe in this respect. It 
is destitute not only of the characteristic trees of the Atlantic 
side, such as Liriodendron, Magnolia, Asimina, Nyssa, Catalpa, 
Sassafras, Carya, and the arboreous Leguminosce (Cercis excepted), 
but it also wants most of the genera which are common 
throughout all the other northern-temperate floras, having 
no Lindens, Elms, Mulberries, Celtis, Beech, Chestnut, Hornbeam, 
and few and small Ashes and Maples. The shrubbery 
and herbaceous vegetation, although rich and varied, is largely 
peculiar, especially at the south. At the north we find a fair 
number of species identical with the eastern ; but it is interesting 
to remark that this region, interposed between the northeast 
Asiatic and the north-east American and with coast approximate 
to the former, has few of those peculiar genera 
which, as I have insisted, witness to a most remarkable connection 
between two floras so widely sundered geographically. 
Some of these types, indeed, occur in the intermediate region, 
rendering the general absence the more noteworthy. And 
certain peculiar types are represented in single identical 
species on the coasts of Oregon and Japan, etc., (such as 
Lysichiton, Fatsia, Glehnia) ; yet there is less community 
between these floras than might be expected from their 
geographical proximity at the north. Of course the highnorthern 
flora is not here in view. 
Now if, as I have maintained, the eastern side of North 
America and the eastern side of northern Asia are the favored 
heirs of the old boreal flora, and if I have plausibly explained 
how Europe lost so much of its portion of a common inheritance, 
it only remains to consider how the western side of 
North America lost so much more. For that the missing types 
once existed there, as well as in Europe, has already been indicated 
in the few fossil explorations that have been made. 
They have brought to light Magnolias, Elms, Beeches, Chestnuts, 
a Liquidambar, etc. And living witnesses remain in the 
two Sequoias of California, whose ancestors, along with Taxodium, 
which is similarly preserved on the Atlantic side, appear 
to have formed no small part of the Miocene flora of the 
arctic regions. 
Several causes may have conspired in the destruction ; — 
climatic differences between the "two sides of the continent, 
such as must early have been established (and we know that 
a difference no greater than the present would be effective) ; 
geographical configuration, probably confining the migration 
to and fro to a long and narrow tract, little wider, perhaps, 
than that to which it is now restricted ; the tremendous outpouring 
of lava and volcanic ashes just anterior to the Glacial 
period, by which a large part of the region was thickly covered 
; and, at length, competition from the Mexican- plateau 
vegetation, — a vegetation beyond the reach of general glacial 
movement from the north, and climatically well adapted to 
the southwestern portion of the United States. 
It is now becoming obvious that the Mexican-plateau vegetation 
is the proximate source of most of the peculiar elements 
of the Californian flora, as also of the southern Rocky 
Mountain- region and of the Great Basin between ; and that 
these plants from the south have competed with those from 
the north on the eastward plains and prairies. It is from this 
source that are derived not only our Cactece but our Mimosece, 
our Daleas and Petalostemons, our numerous and varied Onagracece, 
our Loasacece, a large part of our Compositce, especially 
the Fupatoriacece, Helianthoidece, Plelcnioidem, and 
Mutisiacece, which are so characteristic of the country, the 
Asclepiadece, the very numerous Polemoniacece, PPydrophyllacece, 
Friogonece, and the like. 
I had formerly recognized this element in our North American 
flora ; but I have only recently come to apprehend its full 
significance. With increasing knowledge we may in a good 
measure discriminate between the descendants of the ancient 
northern flora and those which come from the highlands of 
the southwest. 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 
BROWN AND HUMBOLDT. 
Beyond the immediate pale of science, and the circle of 
its most devoted cultivators, the association of the names of 
Humboldt and Brown may seem new and strange ; — the one 
a name familiar to the whole civilized world ; the other, 
hardly known to a large portion of his educated countrymen. 
Yet these names stand together, in the highest place, upon 
the rolls of almost every Academy of Science in the world ; 
and the common judgment of those competent to pronounce it 
will undoubtedly be, that although these vacant places upon 
these honorable rolls may be occupied, they will not be filled, 
in this, perhaps not in several generations. 
Upon the death of Robert Brown, which occurred on the 
10th of June last, in his eighty-fifth year, it was remarked 
that, next to Flumboldt, his name adorned the list of a greater 
number of scientific societies than that of any other naturalist 
or philosopher. It was Humboldt himself who, many years 
ago, saluted Brown with the appellation of " Botanicarum 
facile Prineeps " ; and the universal consent of botanists recognized 
and Confirmed the title. However the meed of merit 
in science should be divided between the most profound, and 
the most active and prolific minds, — between those who divine 
and those who elaborate, —it will probably be, conceded 
by all that no one since Linnaeus has brought such rare sagacity 
to bear upon the structure, and especially upon the ordinal 
characters and natural affinities of plants, as did Robert 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Science, iv. 229. 
(1859.) 
Brown. True, he was fortunate in his time and in his opportunities. 
Men of great genius, happily, often are, or appear 
to be, through their power of turning opportunities to good 
account. The whole herbaria of Sir Joseph Banks and the 
great collections which he himself made around the coast of 
Australia, in Flinder's expedition, and which he was able to 
investigate upon the spot in the four yeara devoted to this exploration, 
opportunely placed in Brown's able hands as it were 
the vegetation of a new world, as rich as it was peculiar, — 
just at the time, too, when the immortal work of Jussieu had 
begun to be appreciated, and the European and other ordinary 
forms of vegetation had begun to be understood in their 
natural relations. The new, various, and singular types which 
render the botany of New Holland so unlike all other, Mr. 
Brown had to compare among themselves, — to unravel their 
intricacies with scarcely a clue to guide him, except that which 
his own genius enabled him to construct in the process of the 
research, — and to bring them harmoniously into the general 
system of botanical natural alliance as then understood, and 
as he was himself enabled to ascertain and display it. It was 
the wonderful sagacity and insight which he evinced in these 
investigations, which, soon after his return from Australia, 
revealed the master mind in botanical science, and erelong 
gave him the position of almost unchallenged eminence, which 
he retained, as if without effort, for more than half a century. 
The common observer must wonder at this general recognition, 
during an era of great names and unequaled activity, of 
a claim so rarely, and as it were so reluctantly, asserted. For 
brief and comparatively few — ■ alas ! how much fewer than 
they should have been ! — are Mr. Brown's publications. 
Much the largest of them is the " Prodromus of the Flora of 
New Holland," issued fifty years ago, which begins upon the 
one hundred and forty-fifth page, and which stopped short 
at the end of the first volume. The others are special papers, 
mostly of small bulk, devoted to the consideration of a particular 
plant, or a particular group or small collection of plants. 
But their simple titles seldom foreshow the full import of 
their contents. Brown delighted to rise from a special case to 
high and wide generalizations ; and was apt to draw most important 
and always irresistible conclusions from small, selected 
data, or particular points of structure, which to ordinary 
apprehension would appear wholly inadequate to the purpose. 
He had unequaled skill in finding decisive instances. So all 
his discoveries, so simply and quietly announced, and all his 
notes and observations sedulously reduced to the briefest expression, 
are fertile far beyond the reader's expectation. Cautious 
to excess, never suggesting a theory until he had thoroughly 
weighed all the available objections to it, and never 
propounding a view which he did not know how to prove, perhaps 
no naturalist ever taught so much in writing so little, 
or made so few statements that had to be recalled, or even 
recast ; and of no one can there be a stronger regret that he 
did not publish more. 
With this character of mind, and while carefully sounding 
his way along the deep places of a science the philosophy and 
ground of which were forming, day by day, under his own 
and a few contemporary hands, Brown could not have been a 
voluminous writer. He could never have undertaken a " Systema 
Regni Vegetabilis," content to do his best at the moment, 
and take upon trust what he had not the means or the 
time to verify, — like his contemporary, De Candolle, who 
may worthily be compared with Brown for genius, and contrasted 
with him for the enthusiastic devotion which constantly 
impelled him to publication, and to lifelong, unselected 
herculean labor, over all the field, for the general good. 
Nor could Brown ever be brought to undertake a " Genera 
Plantarum," like that of Jussieu ; although his favorable and 
leisurely position, his vast knowledge, his keen discrimination, 
and his most compact mode of expression, especially indicated 
him for the task. Evidently, his influence upon the progress 
of botany might have been greater, or at least more immediate 
and more conspicuous. Yet, rightly to estimate that influence 
now, we have only to compare the " Genera Plantarum 
" of Endlicher with that of Jussieu, — separated as they 
are by the half-century which coincided with Brown's career, 
— and mark how largely the points of difference between the 
two, so far as they represent inquiry, and genuine advancement 
in the knowledge of floral structure, actually originated 
with him. Still, after making due allowance for a mind as 
scrupulous and cautious as it was clear and profound, also for 
an unusually retiring disposition, which even in authorship 
seems to have rendered him as sedulous to avoid publicity as 
most writers are to gain it, it must be acknowledged that his 
retentiveness was excessive ; and that his guarded published 
statements sometimes appear as if intended — like the anagrams 
of the older mathematicians and philosophers — rather 
to record his knowledge than to reveal it. But this was probably 
only in appearance, and rather to be attributed to his 
sensitive regard for entire accuracy, and his extreme dislike 
of all parade of knowledge, — to the same peculiarity which 
everywhere led him to condense announcements of great consequence 
into short paragraphs or foot-notes, and to insert 
the most important facts in parentheses, which he who runs 
over the page may read, indeed, but which only the most 
learned and the most reflecting will be apt to comprehend. 
In candor it must be said that his long career has left some 
room for the complaint that he did not feel bound to exert 
fully and continuously all his matchless gifts in behalf of the 
science of which he was the most authoritative expositor. 
But if thus in some sense unjust to himself and to his high 
calling, Brown could never be charged with the slightest injustice 
to any fellow-laborer. Fie was scrupulously careful, 
even solicitous, of the rights and claims of others ; and in 
tracing the history of any discovery in which he had himself 
borne a part, he was sure to award to each one concerned his 
full due. If not always communicative, he was kind and considerate 
to all. To adopt the words of one of his intimate associates, 
" those who knew him as a man will bear unanimous 
testimony to the unvarying simplicity, truthfulness, and benevolence 
of his character," as well as to " the singular uprightness 
of his judgment." 
The remaining and the most illustrious name of all — and 
one in its wide renown strongly in contrast with the last — 
has only just now been inscribed on our obituary list. 
The telegraph of last week brought to us the painful intelligence 
that the patriarch of science, the universal Humboldt, 
died at Berlin on the 6th of May. Born in 1769, a year 
more prolific in great men than any equal period of all preceding 
time, 1 Humboldt had, before the end of the eighteenth 
century, exhibited qualities of the very highest order, 
and obtained a place of acknowledged celebrity in Europe. 
This, however, was the mere prelude to his career, for with 
the close of that century he commenced, with Bonpland, his 
wonderful exploration of Spanish America, which continued 
during five years. This journey must be considered in all future 
time as, substantially, the scientific discovery of Spanish 
America ; and whether we measure its results by the amount 
of knowledge through the wide fields of astronomy, geography, 
geology, mineralogy, meteorology, zoology, botany, 
and political economy, or the personal qualities by which 
this knowledge was collected and reduced to its place in the 
records of science, we cannot hesitate to rank the expedition 
amongst the most important and successful ever executed by 
man. 
/ On his return to Europe, in 1805, Humboldt was employed 
several years in reducing his immense collection of materials 
to form for publication. From that time to his death, a period 
of almost half a century, he resided (except for a short 
time, in which he made his journey to northern Asia) in Europe, 
mostly in France and Germany. The last twelve or fifteen 
years of this great man were principally employed in the 
production of his " Cosmos," — the crowning labor of his long 
life, the harvest of his mature wisdom, — a work that could 
not have been produced by any other man, simply because no 
other man possessed the treasures, or the key to the treasures, 
of the various knowledge contained in it. 
From his return to Europe to his death, he possessed, indisputably, 
the first place among philosophers, for the vast ex- 
1 Napoleon, Wellington, Mehemet Ali, Soult, Lannes, Ney, Castlereagh, 
Chateaubriand, Cuvier, and Humboldt. The name of Metternich 
is sometimes added to this list, probably incorrectly. That of Canning 
does not belong here, nor that of Mackintosh, nor of Sir Walter Scott. 
tent of his acquirements. Without doubt, at all times during 
the present century there have been men much greater than 
Humboldt in each special department of science, but no one 
to compare with him in the number of subjects in which he 
had but few superiors, — no one who could, like him, bring all 
the sciences into one field of view, and compare them as one 
whole, through their relations and dependences. It was probably 
this extent of knowledge that led him to generalization 
rather than particular discovery ; to trace connections and relations, 
rather than to search for new and minute facts or particular 
laws ; to produce the " Cosmos," rather than discover 
the atomic theory or the cellular formation of organic structures. 
Many other men have been masters of several specialties 
; Humboldt alone brought the whole range of the physical 
and natural sciences into one specialty. 
We cannot close this brief notice of the character and career 
of our illustrious associate without one moment's allusion 
to his amiable moral nature, his love of justice, and his superiority 
to all merely personal ends. So strong was his desire 
to give the influence of his high scientific position to the cause 
of civilization and the progress of knowledge, by assisting all 
applicants for his opinion and advice upon scientific subjects, 
that he permitted a correspondence to be extorted from him 
which in his last days became a load too great to be borne, 
and compelled a cry for relief that had hardly subsided when 
the news of his death reached us. 
Such is the faint outline of a man whose name is indelibly 
written with those who have been most eminent in this wonderful 
age of scientific activity. The Academy claims the 
privilege, in common with the learned societies with which he 
was associated throughout the civilized world, to express its 
sorrow for his death, and to offer its tribute of honor to his 
memory. 
AUGUSTIN-PYRAMUS DE CANDOLLE. 
De Candolle was born at Geneva on the fourth day of 
February, 1778 ; he commenced his distinguished career as a 
botanist in Paris in the later days of the French republic ; 
he continued it at Montpellier until 1816, when he returned 
to his native Geneva, where he died in September, 1841, — 
on the fifth day of that month, according to the opening paragraph 
of his son's preface to this volume, 1 ■ — on the twentyfifth 
according to the note by the same excellent authority at 
the close of the Memoir, p. 489. We cannot account for the 
discrepancy ; but the former is without doubt the true date. 
The twenty-one years which have elapsed since his death 
have thinned the ranks of those who knew De Candolle, either 
personally or by correspondence. The " Theorie Eldmentaire," 
the " Organographie," and the " Physiologie Vegetale" have 
played their part, and have long ago passed out of general use. 
Yet, thanks to their influence, but more especially to the " Prodromus," 
the name of De Candolle is still perhaps the most 
prominent one with the cultivators of the science in general the 
world over, — is associated, not indeed with the profoundest 
depths, but with a larger amount of botany than any other 
name except that of Linnaeus. These are the personal memoirs 
of an industrious, highly useful, prosperous, and honored 
life. Begun at middle age, perhaps mainly for the writer's 
own satisfaction, or that of his family, and continued at considerable 
intervals down to his last year, and evidently with 
a growing expectation of future publication, — they have appeared 
none too soon to secure the most interested but rapidly 
narrowing circle of readers. The outer circle, however, is as 
1 Memoires et Souvenirs de Augustiu-Pyramus De Candolle. Ecrit par 
lui-meme. Geneva and Paris, 1862. (American Journal of Science and 
Arts, 2 ser., xxxv. 1. 1863.) 
wide as ever, embracing all the lovers of botany in our day, 
to none of whom can the name of De Candolle be indifferent. 
The memoirs portray not so much the botanist as the man. 
Indeed, the perusal was rather disappointing to us in the former 
regard. We expected to get fresh glimpses of his mind 
at work upon the problems of the time, and to watch the rise 
and development of the ideas which brought him fame. That 
could be had, however, only from letters, diaries, or other contemporary 
records : these are only reminiscences. On this 
account, too, and perhaps because the record was made with 
only a dim and distant view to publication, the narrative 
somehow has not all the vivacity and sprightliness, nor the 
ready flow of language, nor the affluence of anecdote, which 
those who personally knew the writer would have expected. 
There are, however, many favorable specimens of De Candolle's 
powers of delineation, and some amusing anecdotes or 
interesting recollections of distinguished savans and others. 
The family of De Candolle (to retain the style of orthography 
which is kept up at Geneva, in which the De is written 
as a substantial part of the name) is an old and noble one in 
the Provence ; and a branch of it, reaching Naples in the thirteenth 
century in the suite of the Anjou princes, flourished 
there, under a name gradually changed from Candola to Caldora, 
down to the middle of tljfi sixteenth century. Augustin- 
Pyramus De Candolle derived one of his baptismal names 
from his ancestor, Pyramus de Candolle, who, becoming protestant, 
fled from Provence to Geneva in the year 1591, following 
an uncle who had already been established there for 
thirty or forty years. Augustin was the name of his father, 
in his earlier days a Genevan banker, a member of the state 
council, military syndic, and, about the time of the outbreak 
of the French Revolution, Premier Syndic of the little republic. 
Displaced by an earlier coup d'etat just as he was about 
to enter upon the duties of this office, he had retired into the 
country just in time to escape the worst perils of the woful 
imitation at Geneva of the reign of terror, in July, 1794, although 
he was condemned to death for contumacy, and his 
property in the city for a time sequestrated. The rest of his 
life was peaceful and long : he attained the age of eighty-four 
years, and died in 1820. 
Augustin-Pyramus, the writer of this autobiography, appears 
to have been remarkable in his boyhood rather for 
quickness of learning than for scholarship. His early tastes 
were for belles-lettres and poetry. Specimens of his poetical 
productions, both of his youth and of maturer years, are appended 
to the volume. Of their merit we cannot pretend to 
judge. At the age of sixteen he happened to attend a few 
lectures of a short course on botany, given by Vaucher, — 
who, living to a venerable age, survived his distinguished 
pupil. Here he learned the names of the parts of the flower, 
but nothing whatever of classification, having gone into the 
country for the summer before that portion of the course was 
reached. But his curiosity was awakened ; and in his leisure 
hours he began to collect, observe, and even to describe the 
plants he met with in his rambles, at first without any botanical 
book whatever to guide him, and without any idea beyond 
that of amusement or relaxation. The next winter, returning 
to Geneva and to his college studies, he came to know Saussure, 
then in his last years, and half paralytic. The veteran 
physicist, while he endeavored to attract the young man to 
scientific pursuits, discouraged his predilection for botany. 
That he regarded as quite unworthy of serious attention. 
Another summer passed upon the side of the Jura, however, 
and the perusal of Duhamel's " Physique des Arbres," of the 
" Researches upon Leaves " of Pastor Bonnet (a friend of his 
father), also of Hale's "Vegetable Statics," which he painfully 
translated from the English, and finally the acquisition of the 
" Linne de l'Europe " of Gilibert —in which the Linnaean 
artificial classification even then annoyed him by its incongruity 
with the natural relationships which he already recognized : 
these had by this time fixed his fate before he was at all aware 
of it ; and perhaps had even determined in some sort his 
characteristics as a botanist. 
An unexpected opportunity to pass the ensuing winter in 
Paris opened the way. This occurred through an invitation 
from Dolomieu, who, while young De Candolle was herboriz- 
ing in the Jura, had been mineralogizing in the Alps, attended 
by two of De Candolle's school-mates, Picot and Pictet. In 
the autumn of 1796 the three young men proceeded to Paris, 
under the auspices of Dolomieu, who secured for De Candolle 
a lodging immediately over his own apartments, and presented 
him to Desfontaines and Deleuze at the Jardin des Plantes. 
No botanical lectures were given at that season of the year ; 
but De Candolle attended the principal scientific courses then 
in progress ; among them those of Fourcroy and Vauquelin 
upon Chemistry, of Portal and Cuvier upon anatomy, and of 
Hauy upon mineralogy. It was at this early period that his 
acquaintance and life-long intimacy with the excellent Delessert 
family commenced. By a rather ingenious device he 
contrived to make the acquaintance of Lamarck, but he 
gained little thereby in the way of botany, Lamarck being just 
then wholly occupied with the discussion of chemical theories. 
When De Candolle returned to Geneva in the spring of 1797, 
Lamarck sent by his hands a volume to Senebier, and so he 
came to know his amiable countryman, who, in ascertaining 
the capital fact that plants decompose carbonic acid, may be 
said to have laid the foundation of modern vegetable physiology. 
The first genus which De Candolle established (in 
1799) was Senebiera. 
From his narrative it would appear that, during this summer 
of 1797, the ambitious young botanist of two years' standing, 
and only eighteen years old, had not only conceived the 
idea of writing an elementary work, but actually traced the 
plan and written some chapters of it ! He even states that 
from this period date the first observations and the conceptions 
— confused indeed, but correct — of the part which the 
abortion and the union of organs play in floral structure, — 
namely, the ideas which principally distinguish the " Theorie 
Elementaire," published fifteen years later. Flow far these 
ideas were developed, however, we have no means of ascertaining. 
One would like to see an extract from this early 
manuscript, in confirmation. 
The following winter he began to study law at Geneva. 
But with the little state now annexed to the great French 
Republic, the prospects were not encouraging. A career 
must be sought elsewhere. De Candolle determined to study 
medicine, at the same time prosecuting his botanical studies, 
so as to have a double chance, by falling back upon the former 
in case the latter should fail to support him. 
In this view, he returned to Paris in the spring of 1798, 
just in time to see his patron Dolomieu set out for Egypt, as 
one of the savans of that famous expedition, and to decline a 
pressing invitation to accompany him. Taking a lodging in 
the Rue Copeau, to be near the Jardin des Plantes, he attended 
the hospitals and medical lectures, which he disliked, 
but recompensed himself at the Garden of Plants with the 
courses of Lacepede, Lamarck, Cuvier, and Hauy, omitting 
the botanical lectures as not to his mind, but sedulously examining 
the plants of the Garden. He renewed his acquaintance 
with Lamarck, at whose request he wrote a few articles 
(under the letter P) for the " Dictionaire Encyclopedique." 
Lamarck himself by this time had quite abandoned botany. 
It was to Desfontaines that De Candolle was indebted for 
an immediate opportunity of beginning his botanical career. 
It came about thus : LTleritier, who appears to have been 
wealthy, had engaged Redoute, the celebrated flower-painter, 
to prepare drawings of all the fleshy plants in cultivation, it 
being impossible to preserve them well in the herbarium. 
The artist undertaking to publish these drawings, applied to 
Desfontaines for a botanist to furnish the descriptive letterpress. 
The kind Desfontaines recommended De Candolle, 
and moreover offered to direct him in the work. He freely 
opened to the young botanist his herbarium and library, and 
allowed him to study by his side ; indeed Desfontaines was 
his botanical master and fatherly friend. The botanical 
library of LTleritier, then much the largest at Paris, was 
naturally at his service, until the death by assassination, soon 
afterwards, of its singular owner. De Candolle, thus connecting 
his name and studies witli the work of the unrivaled 
flower-painter, acquired thereby, as he remarks, more reputation 
than he deserved, and more instruction than he expected. 
In the course of this same summer, of 1798, an invitation 
from Alexander Brongniart, the mineralogist (whom De Candolle 
had slightly known, through Dolomieu, on his first visit 
to Paris), connected him with a small party of naturalists 
who made an excursion to Fontainebleau. Besides Dejean, 
the entomologist, then very young, Cuvier and Dumeril were 
of the party. In the autumn of the same year he visited 
Normandy, with less celebrated companions, and formed his 
first acquaintance with marine vegetation. The next year he 
made a visit to Holland, to consult the gardens and conservatories 
of that country, the richest in the " plantes grasses," 
which then occupied his attention. One result of this journey 
was that he induced his friend Benjamin Delessert to 
purchase Burmann's herbarium, and thus to lay the foundation 
of the important collections and library at the Hotel Delessert 
which have been so useful to naturalists, and so liberally 
devoted to their service. During the winter of the following 
year De Candolle elaborated the " Astragalogia," his 
first independent work of any considerable consequence, and 
which was published two years later ; in this he found opportunity 
to dedicate to his friend Delessert the Leguminous 
genus Lessertia. 
About this time, namely, at the beginning of the century, he 
became acquainted with Mirbel, who had come up to Paris 
from the south of France, where he had been a pupil of Ramond. 
Instead of translating De Candolle's remarks, we may 
as well give them in the original. 
"II [Mirbel] savait alors peu de botanique, mais il annoncait de 
l'esprit et des talents. Je me liai avee lui. II venait souvent dejeuner 
chez moi. Nous causions botanique ; j'avais deux ou trois 
ans d'avance sur lui, et j'etais naturellement communicatif ; je lui 
fia parts de plusieurs idfes, nouvelles pour lui, et dont quelques-unes 
l'e"taient pour le science. Elles parurent Finterresser, car j'en retrouvai 
une grande partie dans les elements de physiologie qu'il publia 
peu d'anne"es apres ; telles sont la distinction des feuilles se"minales 
et primordiales, l'importance de l'elude des nervures principales des 
feuilles, etc. Appele a rendre un compte succinct de cette ouvrage 
dans le ' Bulletin philomathique,' je me divertis a ne citer que les 
id&s que j'avais suggerees a l'auteur : je n'en revindiquai aucune, 
et ne sais pas meme s'il s'est apercu de cette petite malice. Je dois 
dire que je ne pretendis point, meme alors, que se Mt un plagiat 
volontaire, mais il arrive souvent dans les sciences qu'on s'appropie, 
sans s'en douter, ce qu'on a entendu dire. 
" Cette circonstance eveilla ma propre attention sur la justice rigoureuse 
que j'ai desire rendre a tous : la force de ma memoire, et 
surtout le soin que j'ai eu tres-jeune de noter les faits et les idees 
nouvelles que j'entendais dans la conversation, m'ont mis a meme de 
pouvoir, bien des annees apres une conversation, citer exactement 
celui de qui j'avais appris un fait ou une opinion quelconque. Cette 
habitude de justice m'a fait beaucoup d'amis, et j'ai eu souvent des 
remerciements de gens cites par moi, qui eux-memes avaient oubliC 
ce qu'ils m'avaient dit." (pp. 91, 92.) 
To De Candolle's credit it must be said, not only that his 
career was remarkably free from controversies about priority 
and reclamations, but that his example and precepts, his scrupulous 
care to render due credit to every contributor, his respect 
for unpublished names communicated to his own or 
recorded in other herbaria, and the like, have been most 
influential in establishing both the law and the ethics which 
prevail in systematic botany (more fully, or from an earlier 
period than in the other departments of natural history), 
and which have secured such general cooperation and harmonious 
relations among its votaries. 
In these early days De Candolle was a good deal occupied 
with vegetable physiology; the results are contained in his 
papers "on the pores in the bark of leaves," i. e. stomata ; on 
the vegetation of the Mistletoe ; and on his experiments relative 
to the influence of light on certain points, mainly those 
which exhibit strikingly the change in the position of their 
leaves at night, which has been called the sleep of plants. The 
account of these experiments, in which he caused certain plants 
to acknowledge an artificial night and day, when read before 
the Institute, gave him considerable eclat, — and probably 
also the compliment of being named one of the three candidates 
to fill the vacancy in the Academy of Sciences left by 
the death of L'Fleritier. A mere compliment, for the contest, 
of course, was between Labillardiere and Beauvois. In the 
canvass De Candolle called upon Adanson, then very aged, 
and in his dotage more eccentric than ever. 
If not chosen into the Institute, which indeed he could not 
pretend to expect, De Candolle was in that year made a member 
of that active association, — "la pepiniere de l'Academie 
des Sciences," — the Societe Philomathique, and was soon 
placed on the committee in charge of its Bulletin. This 
brought him into intimate connection with such colleagues 
as Brongniart (Alex.), Dumeril, Cuvier, Biot, Lacroix, and 
Sylvestre. 
" We met, at each other's lodgings, on Saturday evenings, after the 
session of the society, to read and to discuss the morceaux intended 
for the Bulletin, and when our labor was finished we took tea together 
and chatted familiarly. As one by one we exchanged the 
celibate for the married state, our wives were introduced ; — then 
we no longer read our extracts, and at length we gave over making 
the Bulletin, but we kept up our Saturday evening reunions. It was 
in consequence of this that Cuvier continued long afterwards his 
Saturday evening receptions ; but I return to the year 1800." 
By De Candolle's account he was by about ten years the 
youngest member of this reunion. Yet he has the name of 
Biot and Dumeril on his list, both of whom survived him for 
twenty years ; and Biot was really not quite four years his 
senior, and Dumeril only five. 
As a member of this select circle of intimate friends and 
zealous savans, all then pressing on to the very highest distinction, 
we may well believe that the ambitious young botanist 
enjoyed, and improved to the full, such golden opportunities, 
that he learned something of every branch of natural 
history, and also — what was no less useful at Paris — "a 
connaitre les homines et les mobiles caches de bien des 
choses." 
De Candolle sketches the following portraits of three of his 
associates, Dumeril, Cuvier, and Lacroix. And first of 
" The excellent Dumeril. He was the ideal of the frank character 
which we attribute to the Picards. He was a sincere and devoted 
friend, always ready to second and render any service to me and 
mine. No cloud ever threw a shadow over our alliance, which became 
closer yet when, at a later period, the friendly connection of 
my wife with the widowed Madame Say determined the latter to 
marry Dumeril. He was chief demonstrator in the anatomical department 
at the School of Medicine, but he became professor and 
member of the Academy of Sciences. Dumeril was remarkable 
rather for the clearness of his ideas, and the variety and accuracy of 
his knowledge in natural history, than for theoretical principles. He 
was a practical man, whose elementary works had considerable success, 
but who, after having had a glimpse of some of the laws of organic 
symmetry, such as the analogy of the skull to vertebrae, seemed 
to have collapsed before their immensity. His principal services to 
science were in the way of teaching, and in the encouragement which 
he so well knew how to give to the young. The heart in this kind 
of influence is more essential than the head, and although Dumeril' s 
judgment was clear and quick, he was much more remarkable for his 
moral qualities. 
" Cuvier, who was from the beginning the intimate friend of Dumeril, 
was entirely different ; and it would be difficult to find two 
people who were less analogous. Born at Montbeliard and brought 
up at Stuttgart, Cuvier had something of the gravity and even of the 
obstinacy of the German. Placed for some time in an inferior position, 
he was forced from his youth to make up for it by the dignity 
of his manner ; but the world of savans, at least, will never forget 
his sojourn in Normandy, where he made those beautiful investigations 
on the molluscs which were the beginning of his fame. Called 
afterwards to the Jardin des Plantes as assistant to the aged Mertrud, 
he owed this position to the friendship of Geoffroy ; but he 
soon surpassed his patron. In consequence of this position he was a 
member of the Institute from its foundation, and quickly acquired 
the reputation which results from great talent united to a skillful 
ambition. At the time when the office of secretary was annual he 
foresaw it would become perpetual, and arranged in such a manner 
as to fill one secretaryship almost continually, either himself or by 
others ; so that he found himself in position to have it without contest 
when it became permanent and well paid. These first steps 
being taken, all places fell to him as of themselves, and we saw him 
successively Professor of the Ecoles Centrales, of the College de 
France, at the Jardin des Plantes, Inspector, then Councillor, then 
Chancellor of the University, Councillor of State, Baron, Peer of 
France, etc., etc. His talent, his aptitude for knowing and doing 
everything, made him skillful in every function ; he brought to it 
method, order, facility for administration, a knowledge of details 
and of the whole, a sincere love of justice, and a disinterestedness 
which caused him to be noticed and admired. 
" Cuvier might justly be compared to Haller, whom he resembled 
as much as the difference of nation and time would allow. Both 
astonished by their extraordinary capacity for learning, knowing 
equally well natural and historical science, greedy of positive facts 
on all subjects, endowed with wonderful memory and a remarkable 
spirit of order, capable of great labor, and yet gifted with much facility. 
But at the side of these admirable qualities it might be 
observed that neither had an inventive genius ; they observed facts 
well, but never thought to unite them by a theory that would divine 
or discover others. Their characters corresponded even outside of 
science : both loved power, and sacrificed precious time to the desire 
of political advancement ; both loved reading to a passion, even at 
the hours destined ordinarily for meals and domestic intercourse ; 
both were cold and haughty in conversation with those who inspired 
them with no interest, piquant and profound to those whom they 
thought worthy of it ; finally both had a certain contempt for that 
class of ideas called liberal, and held to the aristocratic party. The 
great size of their heads gave them a certain physical resemblance. 
In one word, it would be difficult to find two celebrated men more 
exactly alike, and the lovers of metempsychosis might say, if the 
epochs would permit, that the soul of Haller had passed without 
change into the body of Cuvier. 
" To me personally, Cuvier was wellnigh perfection. . . . Notwithstanding 
the great difference in our respective views of life and 
of politics, and even of science in some theoretical matters, our intimacy 
was never clouded, nor was it disturbed by his quarrel with 
Geoffroy, although he knew that my opinions inclined toward those 
of the latter. 
" The geometrician Lacroix was a genuine specimen of the philosopher 
of the eighteenth century, a republican of the school of Condorcet, 
an enemy to the great and their hangers-on, uniting the 
gaiety of a child with the moroseness of a disappointed old man, — 
the ease, grace, and kindness of a warm-hearted gentleman with the 
gruffness of a grumbler. He was a thoroughly excellent man, but a 
stranger to the life of the world around him. The character of the 
misanthrope in Moliere, which I supposed purely imaginary, I found 
completely realized when I knew Lacroix." 
An episode of fifteen days, during which De Candolle, to 
his great surprise, had political functions to perform, — being 
appointed one of the three notables of the department of the 
Leman, in a representation of all the departments of the 
French Republic, which the First Consul called together, — 
gives us the first glimpse of Bonaparte in this narrative ; and 
De Candolle's account of the interviews with him, and with 
his minister of police, Fouche, is well worth preserving. With 
this transient exception, we have only the most incidental 
allusions to public affairs during the eventful years of the 
Consulate, the Empire, and the Restoration. 
We pass by, also, the interesting account which De Candolle 
gives of the doings of Delessert and himself, in the 
establishment and administration of the Philanthropic Society, 
which grew out of the introduction by them of Count Rumford's 
economical soups, distributed to the poor. These honorable 
undertakings brought the two friends into relations 
with Rumford himself when he came to reside at Pans. Indeed 
Delessert, as we have had occasion to learn, became one 
of Count Rumford's executors. The admiration with which 
Rumford's writings and economical inventions had inspired 
the two young philanthropists was much diminished upon 
personal acquaintance. 
" It was after his plans," writes De Candolle, "that we had 
constructed our furnaces, after his receipts that we made our 
soups, upon his advice that we were induced to substitute 
such assistance for gifts of money." 
So when Rumford was expected at Paris, they congratulated 
themselves upon such an acquisition, went to meet him on his 
arrival, and brought him to dine with them. 
" We found him a dry, methodical man, who spoke of benevolence 
as a discipline, and of the poor as we should not have dared to speak 
of vagabonds. It is necessary, said he, to punish those who give 
alms ; the poor must be forced to work, etc., etc. Great was our 
astonishment at hearing such maxims : however, we did our utmost 
to profit by his advice in practical matters. I had a good deal of 
intercourse with him, one among others odd enough. Mademoiselle 
Rath, a Genevese painter, and like ourselves enthusiastic about 
Rumford, wished to paint his portrait to be engraved. M. Jay. 
her relation and my friend, then director of the ' Decade Philosophique,' 
wished to put it into his journal, and asked me for a notice 
of M. Rumford to accompany it. Knowing little of his former life, 
I asked M. Rumford himself for a few notes ; he promised them, and 
appointed an interview at his house to give them to me. I went : 
what was my astonishment when he presented an article entirely 
complete and quite eulogistic. That was not all ; he required me 
to copy it on the spot, not wishing to leave the manuscript in Lis 
writing in my hands. I thought the proceeding rather indelicate, 
and the distrust not very polite. I deferred however to the wishes 
of a man for whom I had always had until then the highest respect ; 
I obeyed : I transmitted to the ' Decade ' the written article, with 
small additions, and I have never mentioned until after the death of 
Rumford, not even until now, the secret of its origin, thinking that 
this trait would not raise him in estimation. 
"M. Rumford settled in Paris, where he afterwards married 
Madame Lavoisier, the widow of the celebrated chemist. I 
saw something of both, and I never knew an odder union. M. 
Rumford was cold, imperturbable, obstinate, egotistical, prodigiously 
occupied with the material part of life, and in inventions in the 
smallest matters. He was engrossed with chimneys, lamps, coffeepots, 
and windows made after a peculiar fashion ; and he contradicted 
his wife twenty times a day about the management of her 
housekeeping. Madame Lavoisier-Rumford . . . was a woman 
was a woman 
of very decided character. A widow for twelve or fifteen years, 
she had been in the habit of having her own way, and did not like 
to be contradicted. Her mind was broad, her will strong, her character 
masculine. She was capable of lasting friendship, and I could 
always congratulate myself on her kindness to me. Her second 
marriage was soon disturbed by grotesque scenes. Separation was 
better for both than union. He got a pension, which he needed, 
but which death prevented his long enjoying. She obtained liberty 
and the title of Countess : both were satisfied. He could now 
arrange the house at Auteuil as he liked : she continued to receive 
a select circle at hers." 
Of this racy and unflattering sketch we have only to remark 
that, however it may have been as to the pension, Rumford's 
pecuniary means, as shown by his endowments and 
legacies in this country, were more considerable than De 
Candolle supposed. 
Apropos to reminiscences of distinguished savans, we look 
forward a year or two in the narrative, and select the following. 
And first, of a person who was well known to a past 
generation, and to some who still survive, at Philadelphia. 
" Joseph Correa de Serra was then about fifty-five or sixty years 
old. He was of an ancient family in Portugal, which had produced 
several literary men. After studying at the University of Coimbra 
he was transferred to Rome, where he pursued theological studies 
for a dozen years at the College of the Sapienza, but which he left 
with a knowledge of many things beside theology. Returning to 
Portugal, be was made governor to the hereditary Prince, Secretary 
to the Academy of Sciences, etc., and became a very influential 
person, both on account of his talents and on account of the position 
of his pupil, who it was supposed would become king on attaining 
his majority, as his mother was only regent. Correa was made 
Minister ; and his first act was to overthrow the Inquisition. But 
the Prince died just as he was coming of age, and Correa was left 
exposed to the hatred and jealousy of the priests. After a while be 
obtained permission to go to England, where he lived in the society 
of the savans of which Sir Joseph Banks' house was the centre. 
Afterwards he moved to Paris, where he also lived among savans 
and men of letters, and where he showed the most noble character 
when the seizure of Portugal by Bonaparte deprived him of all his 
resources. He possessed the singular faculty of knowing everything 
apparently without labor. It is only the people of the south who 
can thus combine great facility with profound idleness. The latter 
prevented his publishing anything beyond small dissertations, quite 
below his talents ; but in conversation all his various knowledge and 
his ingenious views were charmingly exhibited. In these days 
Humboldt and Cuvier often came to my lodgings, where they occasionally 
met Correa. Although their celebrity was far above his, 
and justly so, on account of their published works, yet Correa always 
got the advantage over them ; and it was by no means the least of 
the enjoyments of our sociable little dinners to see the sort of deference, 
and even fear, which Cuvier and Humboldt exhibited in the 
announcement of their opinions before Correa, who, with the grace 
and sly maliciousness of a cat, would at once expose their weak sides. 
Like them, he was familiar with all the historical and natural sciences, 
and he used his vast stores of knowledge with a severe logic 
and rare sagacity. He spent many hours in my herbarium ; where 
the subtle perspicacity which he brought to bear at a glance upon 
plants, often wholly new to him, taught me much of the art of observing, 
and especially of combining observations in botany. To 
such talents he joined a lofty soul and a heart devoted to friendship. 
It was a great grief to me when, at over sixty years of age, he quitted 
Europe to rejoin in Brazil the king who had persecuted him ; but 
he forgot all his wrongs when his sovereign became unfortunate. 
Correa died when ambassador to the United States." 
The following, of a somewhat later period, is abridged from 
De Candolle' s account of the Societe d'Arcueil : — 
" Its founder was the excellent and illustrious Berthollet, who, then 
living in his country residence at Arcueil, . . . invited thither, once 
a month, a few young savans, by way of encouraging their efforts. 
His colleagues MM. de la Place and Chaptal, also senators and 
members of the Institute, were, so to say, vice-presidents of this 
little reunion. Humboldt also had a place, and the parterre was 
composed of Biot, Thenard, Gay-Lussac, Descotils, Malus, Amedee 
Berthollet, and myself. Later, Berard and Francois de la Roche 
were admitted. [And finally Arago, Poisson, and Dulong, adds the 
editor, who notes that the last volume of the " Memoires d'Arcueil " 
was published in 1817.] The association was devoted to the physical 
and chemical sciences. I was admitted in view of the applications 
of vegetable physiology to chemistry ; and I contributed some articles 
upon this subject to the ' Memoires d'Arcueil,' namely, my 
Note on the cause of the direction of stems towards the light, my 
Memoir on the influence of absolute height upon vegetation, and 
upon the geographical or topographical distribution of plants, and, 
later, one upon double flowers, especially of the Ranunculacem. 
The first of these writings was a simple and clear solution [although 
an incorrect one, as it proves. — Eds.] of a problem which was 
deemed insoluble ; the second reduced to just proportions the exaggerations 
of Humboldt upon the influence of elevation ; the third 
was an essay connected with the observations of the degenerescence 
of organs, to which my ' Theorie Elementaire ' was devoted. . . . 
•' We commonly made our rendezvous at Thenard's, and went 
together to Arcueil, as happy with this run into the country as 
schoolboys out for a holiday. We walked about in this pleasant 
villa, and relished the society of our leaders. Nothing can fully 
describe the good-nature and simplicity of M. Berthollet and even 
of Madame. They were with us as parents with their children, and 
we made ourselves at home in the house with perfect abandon. M. 
Berthollet was quite fat and very full-blooded. He feared heat so 
much that he wore clothes only out of respect to society, and at night 
he slept entirely uncovered upon his bed. * What,' said we, ' even 
in winter ? ' ' Oh,' he answered, ' when it is very cold I spread my 
pocket-handkerchief over my feet.' This man, so high in social 
rank and scientific celebrity, bore contradiction unusually well, and 
loved above all things truth. When the first works of Berzelius 
upon definite proportions became known at Paris, I was very much 
taken with them, and although they were in direct opposition to the 
principles of statical chemistry he sustained, I did not fear to tell 
M. Berthollet the high opinion I had of them. Far from taking 
offense at this preference, he encouraged me to study the writings 
of Berzelius. 
"M.de la Place was of quite a different character. He had the 
dryness of a geometrician and the haughtiness of a parvenu. Over 
and above these defects of manner, he was a man of honor and 
worth. . . . He often seconded me, although in truth he thought 
very little of natural history. In our meetings he often had little 
quarrels with M. Berthollet, and would think to silence him by saying, 
' But you see, M. Berthollet, what I say to you is mathematics.' 
' Eh, par Dieu, what I say to you is physics,' answered the other, 
' and that is quite as good.' . . . Humboldt also came from time to 
time ; but he added much of life and interest when he appeared. 
He affected to pass himself as the creator of the science of botanical 
geography, to which he has only added certain facts, and the exaggeration 
of a true theory so as to render it almost false. He 
never quite pardoned me for having, in the preface to my memoir 
on the geography of the plants of France, cited those who before 
him had occupied themselves with geographical botany, although in 
this exposition I had, in truth, much amplified his share. 
" Among the other members of the society of whom I have not 
yet spoken, I would chiefly mention Thenard, who was then commencing 
a career which has since become very brilliant. His activity, 
his ardor, and his uprightness pleased me very much. ... I 
could draw, in an anecdote, the contrast between the characters of 
Thenard and Descotils. ... It was then very difficult to correspond 
with England, on account of the continental blockade. I happened 
to be the first to receive, by a letter from Dr. Marcet, the news of 
Davy's great discovery in decomposing the fixed alkalies. By a 
happy chance, it reached me on the morning of the day of our meet- 
ing. I hastened to our usual rendezvous, and could not wait for 
the session to impart so important a discovery. I read my letter to 
the members present. Thenard was enthusiastic ; he ran about the 
room like a madman, crying out, 'It is beautiful ! it is admirable ! ' 
Then turning to me, and laying hold of his arm : ' Look here,' said 
he, ' I would give this arm to have made this discovery.' Descotils, 
tranquilly buried in an arm-chair, said also, but in quite another 
tone Xlt is very fine ; but I would not give the end of my little 
finger to have made it.' " 
We pass over all De Candolle's account of his life and domestic 
affairs during his residence at Paris, his particular investigations, 
his excursions, in Switzerland and elsewhere, — 
even the memorable one in the Jura with Biot and Bonpland. 
in which he led the party into a position of imminent danger, 
causing Bonpland to bemoan his hard fate in having to perish 
on such a mole-hill as the Jura, after having safely climbed 
Chimborazo (p. 154) ; — his engagement and marriage (the 
latter in April, 1802), with Mademoiselle Torras, of a Genevan 
family resident in Paris ; of the foundation of his herbarium 
by the fortunate acquisition of that of LTleritier ; — 
of the first course of lectures which he gave, at the College 
de France, as a substitute for Cuvier, during the temporary 
absence of the latter, giving a course of vegetable physiology 
in place of one on general natural history ; — how he prepared 
to take the degree of M. D. in order to qualify himself as a 
candidate for the chair of medical natural history at the 
School of Medicine, then vacant ; but how Richard, who disliked 
him because he was a pupil of Desfontaines, as De Candolle 
says, instigated Jussieu to offer himself for this chair, 
upon which, of course, De Candolle withdrew, but nevertheless 
wrote and sustained as a thesis for the doctorate, his Essay 
on the Medical Properties of Plants, compared with their exterior 
forms and their natural classification. He bore his 
examination creditably, received his diploma, and, the same 
evening, a private mock inauguration, which, considering the 
parties engaged in it, must have been irresistibly comical. 
" Dumeril invited to his house my family, my comrades of the 
' Bulletin Philomathique,' and even some of the Professors of the 
Ecole de Medicine. This grave assembly amused themselves in giving 
me the reception, in full dress, from the ' Malade imaginaire.' 
It was a curious sight to see Cuvier, Lacroix, Biot, and other learned 
Academicians rehearsing the scene from Moliere in the costumes of 
the Comedie Francaise. They had smothered me in an immense 
sugar-loaf paper cap ornamented all over with little lamps all alight. 
In the motion of bowing I constantly expected to be set on fire. 
But the acolyte who conducted me would then press a sponge well 
filled with water borne on the top of the cap, and the water ran 
down, not upon the lamps, but upon my head, — the audience 
laughing uproariously at my surprise." 
Let us pass on to more serious matters, and rapidly sketch 
the outlines of the scientific career now fairly and promisingly 
opening. For the event which fixed De Candolle in his true 
field of labor was his arrangement (in 1802) with Lamarck — 
who had long since abandoned botany — to prepare a new 
edition of the " Flore Francaise." The arrangement was a 
favorable one to De Candolle, both financially and scientifically. 
The new edition was of course an entirely new work, 
one particularly adapted to De Candolle's genius, and which 
gave him at once a wide reputation. Indirectly this work 
gave origin to the botanical explorations of the provinces of 
France, under the auspices of the government, which engaged 
much of De Candolle's attention from the summer of 1806 
until he ceased to be a French subject. 
And now, the death of old Adanson left a vacancy in the 
botanical section of the Institute, which De Candolle might 
hope to fill. But parties and personal dislikes, as it appears, 
were not unknown nor uninfluential in the Paris of half a 
century ago. Indeed De Candolle (let us hope without sufficient 
grounds) roundly charges lamentable weakness to Lamarck, 
and less creditable motives to Fourcroy and even to 
Jussieu, in respect to the nomination and canvass ; while of 
the Abbe Hauy he relates, to his credit, that, upon being approached 
with the suggestion that his conscience should prevent 
his voting for a protestant, he replied that he was very 
glad of an opportunity to show that he never mixed up religious 
opinions with scientific judgments. Palisot de Beauvois, 
the rival candidate, was elected, in spite of the hearty support 
De Candolle received from his comrades of the "Bulletin 
Philomathique " and his eminent associates of the Socnete 
d'Arcueil, Berthollet, Chaptal, La Place, Cuvier, etc., —to 
say nothing of his scientific superiority over his rival, which 
De Candolle naturally regarded as very great. M that time, 
according to De Candolle, Beauvois had produced, " ni la 
' Flore d'Oware,' ni le ' Prodrome de l'Etheogamie,' ni en un 
mot aucun de ses ouvrages qui," etc. But in this De Candolle's 
memory was perhaps at fault ; for, while this election 
took place in the autumn of 1806, the latter of these works 
of Beauvois, according to Pritzel, was published in 1805, and 
the first volume of the former in 1804. 
Evidently the disappointment was keenly felt. Membership 
in the Institute secured not only an assured position but 
also a comfortable little annuity. This, and the prospective 
needs of an increasing family, disposed De Candolle to look 
elsewhere, and to accept, after some hesitation, the botanical 
chair at the University of Montpellier, which in 1807 became 
vacant by the death of Broussonet. Hardly was he established 
there when the death of Ventenat, in the autumn of 
1808, made him again a candidate for a seat in the Institute ; 
again an unsuccessful one, but now chiefly because a considerable 
number of his particular friends in the Institute 
required a promise that if chosen he would reside at Paris, 
which he could not with propriety give. So they voted for 
Mirbel ; — and De Candolle took root at Montpellier, where 
he flourished from 1808 to the year 1816. 
That De Candolle, full of ambition and with a good opinion 
of his abilities, should have disliked to give up Paris is 
natural; but he himself afterwards records the opinion 
(which we share) that his removal from the metropolis was 
the best thing for him, as enabling him to accomplish more 
for botany. And as to the honors of the Institute, his disappointments 
were more than made up to him in the sequel 
by his election as one of the eight foreign associates of the 
Academy of Sciences. 
At Montpellier, De Candolle was heartily welcomed by his 
colleagues, by the official personages, and by the protestant 
society of the city, — in those days there was little social intercourse 
between catholics and protestants in the south of 
France, — and he gave himself with ardor and success to his 
new duties. He renovated the botanic garden, — the oldest 
in France, founded by Henry IV., — and secured additional 
funds for its support. He built up the botanical school, and 
developed peculiar talents as an instructor, — with results 
perhaps up to the average as respects the making of botanists 
; but Dunal, one of his earliest pupils, was about the 
only one at Montpellier who achieved a general reputation, 
and his fell much below expectations. He continued and extended 
his official botanical explorations of the provinces of 
France, making annual reports to the Minister of the Interior, 
and planning a very comprehensive work on the " Statique 
Vegetale de la France," which, however, owing to political 
and other changes, was never written. He wrote and published 
the " Theorie Elementaire " which made his reputation 
as a theoretical botanist, and waell exemplifies the characteristics 
of his genius in this regard, • — constructive rather than 
critical, — quick and ingenious in seizing analogies and in 
framing hypotheses, rather than sagacious in testing their 
validity, — content with an hypothesis which neatly connects 
observed facts, but not so solicitous to prove it actually true, 
nor urgent to follow it out to ultimate conclusions, — a lucid 
expositor, and a happy diviner within a certain reach, rather 
than a profound investigator, — in short, a generalizer rather 
than an analyzer. 1 
At Montpellier, also, De Candolle planned his " Systema 
Vegetabilium " — a systematic and detailed account of all 
known plants, arranged under their natural families, — and 
1 It is curious that De Candolle, who early took to the ideas of Geoffroy 
in anatomy who founded his morphology of the flower upon the idea 
of symmetry, and recognized the homology of the floral organs with 
leaves, and who could have got from the writings of his townsman, Bonnet, 
enough of phyllotaxy for the purpose, seems never to have thought 
of connecting the one with the other, nor to have asked himself why a 
flower is symmetrical. 
he there prepared the first volume of this work ; thus, with 
characteristic ardor and courage, but without calculating its 
immensity, entering upon the grand and most important undertaking 
of his life, and into that field of labor in systematic 
and descriptive botany for which he was eminently adapted, 
by his enterprising disposition and unflagging industry, his 
capacity for sustained labor, his excellent memory, his spirit 
of order and method, his quickness of eye, and his great aptitude 
for generalization. 
The overthrow of the Empire, the Restoration, the Hundred 
Days, and the final fall of Napoleon supervened. De 
Candolle's life at Montpellier was troubled and his prospects 
precarious. He naturally turned to his native Geneva, where 
he had kept up intimate social relations ; and when he had 
ascertained that a place would be provided for him, he exchanged 
the comparatively ample emoluments of the chair at 
Montpellier for the very humble salary of one at Geneva, 
encumbered with the duty of lecturing upon zoology as well 
as botany. 
Pending the change he made a visit to England, in 1816, 
of which a detailed account is given, with reminiscences of the 
botanists and others whose personal acquaintance he then 
made. We regret that we have no room left for further extracts 
: his account of Brown is expressive of the great respect 
he entertained for him, and that of Salisbury and of 
Lambert is amusing. 
Settled now at Geneva, at the good working age of thirtyeight, 
the narrative of his steadily industrious and prosperous 
life, and of his happy surroundings, flows on for nearly two 
hundred pages, down to the sad overthrow of his health by 
an overdose of iodine in 1836, his partial convalescence and 
resumption of botanical work in 1837, and ends with the record 
of the death of his only brother, at the beginning of the 
year 1841, only eight months before his own. 
These twenty-five years witnessed the publication of the 
two volumes of the " Systema " ; the change of plan to a 
" Species Plantarum " in a restricted form, more nearly 
within the limits of a mortal's life and powers ; the publica- 
tion of the " Organographie " and of the " Physiologie Vegetale," 
and — not to mention a hundred other botanical and 
sundry miscellaneous writings, of greater or smaller extent — 
of seven out of the present fifteen volumes of the " Prodromus." 
Only one botanist of the present century — and one 
happily who still survives — has accomplished an equal 
amount of work, and good work, in systematic botany. 
Our account has run on to such a length that we cannot touch 
upon De Candolle's social and domestic life —of which the 
memoirs reveal pleasant glimpses, nor of his useful and honorable 
life as a Genevan and Swiss citizen. Nor can we now 
venture to gather interesting anecdotes from his notices of 
friends, visitors, pupils, and collaborators ; nor notice his 
methods of working, and his capital arrangements for securing 
and classifying details and economizing time. 
It is not for us to pronounce upon De Candolle's relatiye 
rank in the hierarchy of naturalists. He incidentally once 
speaks of Brown and himself as rivals for the botanical 
sceptre. It is natural that they should be compared, or 
rather contrasted ; for they were the complements of each 
other in almost every respect. The fusion of the two would 
have made a perfect botanist. But De Candolle's facility for 
generalization, zeal, and industry were as much above, as 
his depth of insight and analytical power were below Brown's. 
The one longed, the other loathed, to bring forth all he knew. 
The editor compares De Candolle's traits of character with 
those of Linnaeus, as delineated by Fabricius, and finds much 
resemblance. But his impress upon the science, however 
broad and good, can hardly be compared with that of Linnseus. 

BENJAMIN D. GREENE. 
Benjamin D. Gkeene, Esq., of Boston, died on the 14th 
of October last, at the age of sixty-nine years. He was born 
in 1793, and graduated at Harvard University in the year 
1812. He first pursued legal studies, partly in the then celebrated 
school at Litchfield, Connecticut, and was duly admitted 
to the bar in Boston. He then took up the study of 
medicine, and completed his medical course in the medical 
schools of Scotland and Paris, taking his medical degree at 
Edinburgh in the year 1821. The large advantages of such 
a training having been enjoyed, Mr. Greene did not engage 
in the practice of either profession. An ample inheritance, 
which rendered professional exertion unnecessary, conspiring 
with a remarkably quiet and contemplative disposition and a 
refined taste, led him to devote his time to literary culture and 
to scientific pursuits. His fondness for botany, which early 
developed, was stimulated by personal intercourse with various 
European botanists, and especially with his surviving 
friend, the now venerable Sir William Flooker, then professor 
at the University of Glasgow, to whom he naturally became 
much attached, and by whom he was highly appreciated. 
In botany, as in everything else, Mr. Greene sought to be 
silently useful. He never himself published any of his discoveries 
or observations. The few species to which his name 
is annexed were given to the world at second hand. But his 
collections were extensive, his original observations numerous 
and accurate, and both were freely placed at the disposal 
of working botanists. He early saw that the great obstacles 
to the advantageous prosecution of botanical investigation in 
this country, and especially in New England, were the want 
of books and the want of authentic collections ; and these 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxv. 419. (1803.) 
desiderata he endeavored, so far as he could, to supply. He 
gathered a choice botanical library, he encouraged explorations, 
and he subscribed to all the large purchasable North 
American collections, — beginning with those of Drummond 
in the southern United States and in the then Mexican province 
of Texas. These being distributed under numbers, among the 
principal herbaria of the world, and named or referred to in 
monographs or other botanical works, were of prime importance 
as standards of comparison. Such collections and such 
books as Mr. Greene brought together were just the apparatus 
most needed at that time in this country ; and now when 
our wants are somewhat better supplied, we should not forget 
the essential service which they have rendered, nor the disinterested 
kindness with which their most amiable and excellent 
owner always placed them at the disposal of those who could 
advantageously use them. Mr. Greene's botanical library 
and collections have been, by gift and bequest, consigned to 
the Boston Society of Natural History, of which he was one of 
the founders and the first president, and by which they will be 
preserved for the benefit of future New England botanists, bv 
whom his memory should ever be gratefully cherished. The 
genus Greenea, established by Wight and Arnott upon two 
rare Rubiaceous shrubs of India, barely anticipated a similar 
dedication by his old friend Mr. Nuttall, of a curious Grass of 
Arkansas and Texas, and will perpetuate his name in the 
annals of the science which he lovingly cultivated. 
CHARLES WILKINS SHORT. 
Dr. Charles Wilkins Short died at his residence at 
Louisville, Kentucky, on the 7th of March last, in the sixtyninth 
year of his age. Fie was born in Woodford County of 
that State, on October 6, 1794, was educated in the school 
of Mr. Joshua Frye, near Danville, — a distinguished teacher 
of those days, — pursued his professional studies mainly in 
Philadelphia, where he took the degree of M. D. from the 
University of Pennsylvania in the year 1815. For ten years 
he devoted himself to the practice of medicine, until in the 
year 1825 he was called to the chair of Materia Medica and 
Medical Botany in the Transylvania University at Lexington, 
where he contributed to the reputation of that celebrated 
school. Relinquishing medical practice, for which he had no 
liking, he devoted his powers with zeal and success to the 
more congenial duties of his professorship, and to the cultivation 
of botany, the favorite pursuit of his life. At the close 
of the year 1838 he removed, along with some of his distinguished 
colleagues, to Louisville, filling the same chair in the 
University of that city until 1849, when he retired from 
public functions. The remainder of his honorable life was 
passed at Hayfield, at his tasteful residence near Louisville, in 
the bosom of his family ; in the exercise of kindly but unostentatious 
hospitality and of all good offices ; in quietly enjoying 
and in causing others to enjoy the blessings of a handsome 
fortune, to which by inheritance, combined with the 
fruits of his own industry, he now attained, and in the cultivation 
of the "amiable science" to which he was devotedly 
attached. 
Dr. Short's botanical publications were neither large nor 
many. They were chiefly articles contributed to the " Tran- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxv. 451. (1863.) 
sylvania Journal of Medicine," etc., of which he was for some 
time one of the editors. The most important is his Catalogue 
of the plants of his native state (which he widely and assiduously 
explored), and several supplements; with well considered 
characters of some new species, and acute and discriminating 
notes up'on several imperfectly known plants. These 
and the copious manuscript observations which he was for 
many years accustomed to communicate to his botanical correspondents, 
showed what he was capable of accomplishing, had 
not a most retiring and unambitious disposition unduly limited 
his exertion. It was not activity or persevering labor, 
but publicity, that he shrunk from. He was a very industrious 
botanist, and an effectual promoter of our science in this 
country. His great usefulness in this field was mainly owing 
to the extent and the particular excellence of his personal collections, 
and to the generous profusion with which he distributed 
them far and wide among his fellow-laborers in this and 
other lands. He and the late Mr. Oakes — the one in the 
west and the other in the east, but independently — were the 
first in this country to prepare on an ample scale dried specimens 
of uniform and superlative excellence and beauty, and in 
lavish abundance for the purpose of supplying all who could 
need them. Dr. Short's disinterested activity in these respects 
has enriched almost every considerable herbarium both 
at home and abroad, and set an example which has produced 
large and good results among us. The vast improvement in 
the character of the dried specimens now generally made by 
our botanists may be mainly traced to the example and influence 
of Dr. Short and Mr. Oakes. As might be expected, Dr. 
Short's own herbarium is a model of taste and neatness. It is 
also large and important. To one himself so solicitous "to 
do good and to communicate," contributions from numerous 
sources naturally flowed abundantly. He, moreover, subscribed 
to all the North American distributed collections 
within his reach, and he set on foot or efficiently furthered 
several distant or difficult botanical explorations. He purchased, 
at a liberal price, the important botanical collections 
of Texas and northern Mexico, left by Berlandier, which 
Lieutenant (now General) Couch acquired of his widow and 
sent on to Washington ; and, retaining one set for his own 
herbarium, he caused the rest to be distributed among the 
botanists to whom they would be most useful, — especially 
including two Swiss botanists who had contributed to send out 
Berlandier to Mexico as a collector, but from whom (apparently 
through Berlandier's dishonesty) they had failed to receive 
any adequate return. It is understood that Dr. Short's 
rich herbarium — to which a lifetime of thoughtful attention 
and much expense were lovingly devoted — is now offered, by 
a wise, bequest, to the custody of the Smithsonian Institution, 
under instructions that it shall be permanently well cared for 
and always open to be consulted by botanists. It will there 
form an excellent and conspicuous nucleus for a collection of 
American herbaria, such as our science needs, and the country 
ought to possess. 
The natural effects upon his scientific career of a fastidious 
taste, an unwarrantable diffidence, and a too retiring disposition, 
were enhanced by a constitutional tendency to depression 
of spirits. But this never obscured the native kindness of his 
heart, nor the real though so quiet geniality of his disposition, 
nor checked an unobtrusive and considerate benevolence. 
With an uncompromising sense of right and justice, and a 
keen hatred of everything mean and unworthy, he was never 
harsh or even cynical. All who knew him well, and also his 
more intimate correspondents who never enjoyed the privilege 
of a personal acquaintance, can testify to the nobility and 
Christian excellence of his character. An appreciative tribute 
to his memory from the pen of a former colleague will 
be found in the " Louisville Journal," issued a few days after 
Dr. Short's lamented death. 
Two or three species of Kentucky plants commemorate the 
name of Dr. Short as their discoverer. Also a new genus 
Shortia, inhabiting the Alleghany Mountains, was dedicated 
by him to the present writer. But, alas ! too like the botanist 
for whom it was named, it is so retiring in its habits that it is 
not known as it ought to be, but lives as yet unseen, except 
by a single botanist of a former generation, in some secluded 
recess of the Black Mountain of North Carolina. It will 
some day be found again and appreciated. 
FRANCIS BOOTT. 
Francis Boott, M. D., died at his residence in London 
on Christmas morning, in the seventy-first year of his age. 
He was born in Boston, on the 26th of September, 1792. 
His father, Kirk Boott, came to this country early in life, 
from Derbyshire, England, became a successful merchant 
in Boston, was one of the pioneers of manufacturing enterprise 
here, and one of the founders of Lowell, — the type, if 
not wholly the original of manufacturing towns. His Boston 
residence was on the site now occupied by the Revere House, 
of which the Boott mansion forms a part. Francis Boott 
entered Harvard University in the year 1806, and took his 
bachelor's degree in 1810. A year after, being then in his 
nineteenth year, namely, in the summer of 1811, he sailed 
for England, intending to enter a counting-room in Liverpool, 
as a preparation for mercantile life. This plan, however, 
was soon relinquished ; and the three succeeding years were 
mainly spent with his relatives and their friends near Derby, 
where he made the acquaintance of Mrs. Hardcastle, his future 
mother-in-law, who was something of a botanist, and 
where he formed both the scientific and social attachments 
which determined the aims and secured the happiness of his 
whole afterlife. Returning to Boston at the close of the year 
1814, he engaged with enthusiasm in botanical pursuits, and 
amassed a good collection of New England plants. In the 
summer of 1816 he took a leading part in a botanical exploration 
of the mountains of New England, ascending in the 
course of one journey, Wachusett, Monadnock, Ascutney, and 
Mount Washington ; and later in the season Dr. Boott with 
his brother visited and ascended Moosehillock. His companions 
in the extended and then formidable tour which culmi- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xxxvii. 288. (1864.) 
nated in the White Mountains — then to be reached only by 
a laborious journey of two days on foot — were Francis C. 
Gray, Judge Shaw, Nathaniel Tucker, and Dr. Jacob Bigelow, 
the Nestor of New England botany, now the sole surviving 
member of the party. An interesting account of the ascent 
of Mount Washington, written by Dr. Bigelow, was published 
at the time in the fifth volume of the " New England 
Journal of Medicine and Surgery." 
In the year 1820 Dr. Boott crossed the Atlantic for the 
last time, and proceeding to London entered upon the study 
of medicine, under the direction of the late Dr. Armstrong. 
He continued his medical studies at the University of Edinburgh, 
where he took the degree of M. D. in 1824. The next 
year he established himself in London, we believe in the very 
house in Gower Street where he resided until the day of his 
death. He was soon associated with his near friend and former 
teacher in the work of instruction, becoming Lecturer on Botany 
in the Webb Street School of Medicine, where Dr. Armstrong 
was Professor of Materia Medica. 
"His lectures are said to have been admirable, both in 
matter and style, and to have excited much enthusiasm ; 
whilst his untiring efforts to promote the welfare of his pupils 
in other ways were so deeply and generally felt, that, on the 
eve of his too early withdrawal from the lectureship, they in 
one day raised a large subscription to present to their friend 
and teacher ; — a tribute which, with the characteristic 
modesty and consideration, was declined as soon as heard of. 
He was, however, afterwards persuaded to accept a collection 
of books instead, in remembrance of their grateful feelings 
and good will." 
The early death of Dr. Armstrong, cutting short a distinguished 
career, imposed upon his friend the duties of a biographer 
and expositor. Accordingly, after much preparation, 
Dr. Boott, in the year 1834, published two octavo volumes, 
entitled, " Memoir of the Life and Medical Opinions of 
John Armstrong, M. D. ; to which is added an Inquiry into 
the facts connected with those forms of Fever attributed to 
Malaria and Marsh Effluvium." He published, besides, in 
the year 1827, two introductory Lectures on Materia Medica, 
which gave a good idea of his excellence as a teacher. Although 
he did not continue in this career, his interest in 
medical and scientific education never abated. He was an active 
promoter of the establishment of London FTniversity (now 
University College), and was for more than a quarter of a 
century an influential member of its senate and council. He 
was successfully engaged for some time in medical practice, 
and was for many years Physician to the American Embassy ; 
but he gradually withdrew from professional cares and toils 
to more congenial literary and scientific pursuits. As early 
as the year 1819 he had become a Fellow of the Linnaean 
Society of London ; and afterwards, for the last twenty-five 
years, he gave it continuous and invaluable service as secretary, 
treasurer, or vice-president. 
At one time it was thought that Dr. Boott might be recalled 
to his native country and to an active scientific life. Nearly 
thirty years ago he was offered the chair of natural history 
in Flarvard University, — a chair which had remained vacant 
since the death of Professor Peck in 1822, although its duties 
were for several years fulfilled by the late Mr. Nuttall. After 
Nuttall left Cambridge to explore Oregon and California, 
arrangements were made to endow the vacant professorship 
properly in case Dr. Boott would accept the place. Although 
the offer was declined, we have been told that he intimated a 
willingness to accept it if the chair were simply that of botany 
; and when informed that he might practically make it 
so, although the title was unchangeable, he insisted that he 
would not be called a professor of natural history, while he 
could pretend to a knowledge only of botany. 
Nearly thirty years ago, Dr. Boott began seriously to devote 
his energies to the special work upon which his scientific 
reputation mainly rests, namely, to the study of the vast and 
intricate genus Carex. The first result of these studies appeared 
in his elaboration of the Carices of British North 
America in Sir William Hooker's "Flora Boreali-Americana," 
published in 1840. Other papers upon Carices were 
contributed to the " Transactions of the Linnaean Society," 
the " Journal of the Boston Society of Natural History," etc. 
As it had always been the greatest pleasure, we might say the 
business of his life to assist others, so now friends and correspondents 
from all parts of the world hastened to place in 
his hands the fullest sets of their collections in this difficult 
genus ; and he was able to study, in the unrivaled caricological 
collection he thus formed, and the various public and private 
herbaria to which he had access, almost all of the six 
hundred or more species which the genus was computed by 
him to comprise, to compare them in numerous specimens of 
their various forms, and to examine them, group after group, 
with untiring and closest scrutiny. At length, early in the 
year 1858, he gave to the world (literally gave to the world) 
the first volume of his great work, entitled " Illustrations of 
the Genus Carex," a folio volume with two hundred plates, 
admirably representing about that number of species. A very 
large proportion of them were North American species, in 
which he naturally always took a special interest. In the 
letter of dedication of this work to his friend, John Amory 
Lowell, Esq., of Boston, Dr. Boott states that his original 
design " was limited to the Carices of North America," but 
that the large collections brought by Dr. Flooker from the 
East Indies, and placed in his hands for study, caused him to 
extend his plan, and to endeavor to illustrate the genus at 
large. With characteristic modesty he makes no allusion to 
the years of labor and the large amount of money (savings 
from a moderate income by a simple mode of life) which the 
volume had cost him ; the drawings, engravings, and letterpress 
having been produced at his sole individual expense, 
and the larger part of the copies freely given away. Nor did 
he put forth any promise to continue the work. But in 1860 
Part Second quietly appeared, without a word of preface. 
This contains 110 plates. Two years after, this was followed 
by Part Third, with 100 plates, making 410 in all ; and it is 
understood that the materials of a fourth volume are left in 
such forwardness that they may perhaps be published by his 
surviving family. 
Our own estimate of this work has been recorded in the 
pages of this Journal, as the successive volumes were received. 
This motto, which the author placed upon his title-pages, — 
" The man who labors and digests things most, 
Will be much apter to despair than boast," 
is felicitously expressive both of the endless difficulties of the 
subject, and of his undervaluation of his endeavors to overcome 
them. A most competent judge briefly declares that, — 
" This work is certainly one of the most munificent contributions 
ever made to scientific botany, besides being one of 
the most accurate ; on which account it certainly entitles its 
author to take a much higher place amongst botanists than 
that of an amateur, which was all that his modesty would 
allow him to lay claim to." 
Dr. Boott's health, which had long been delicate, was much 
shattered in the winter of 1839-40 by a dangerous attack of 
pneumonia. " From this time he had repeated slight attacks ; 
but no alarming symptoms occurred till June, 1863, when the 
remaining lung gave way, and from that time he never fairly 
rallied. He died at his residence, 24 Gower Street, on Christmas 
dav, retaining to the last his faculties and all the characteristics 
of his most admirable life." 
Dr. Boott was a man of singular purity, delicacy, and goodness 
of character, and of the most affectionate disposition. 
Few men of his ardent temperament and extreme sense of justice 
ever made fewer enemies or more friends. To the latter 
he attached himself with entire devotion. If there were any 
of the former, probably no man ever heard him speak ill of 
them. His published works suffice to place his name imperishably 
upon the records of science. But only his contemporaries 
and friends will know how much he has done to help 
others, and how disinterestedly and gracefully that aid was 
ever rendered. He took with him to England, upon his return 
in the year 1820, a valuable herbarium of New England 
plants, especially those of the White Mountains, which were 
then rare and little known. He must have valued this collection 
highly, and have expected to use it. But he presented 
the whole of it to Dr., now Sir William Hooker, when he saw 
how serviceable it would be to him in the preparation of the 
" Flora Boreali-Americana." His British herbarium was 
long ago similarly given to a then young American botanist. 
Another, who, twenty-five years ago, called to take leave of 
him upon returning to this country, found, as he left, the seat 
of his cab loaded with choice botanical books, which Dr. Boott 
had at the moment sent there from the shelves of his own library, 
where they were not duplicates. We know of one or 
two instances where he had commenced a critical study of a 
particular genus with a view to publication, but, upon learning 
that another person had taken up the same subject, he 
dispatched to him his own notes and other materials. The 
Linnaean Society of London owes no little of its present prosperity 
to his long and faithful services and his wise counsels. 
He kept up an active correspondence with his friends in this 
country ; and for more than thirty years our young professional 
men, naturalists, and others who have visited Europe, 
have experienced cordial welcome and thoughtful kindness at 
his hands. The following gives a good idea of the man : — 
" When practicing as a physician he discarded the customary 
black coat, knee-breeches, and silk stockings, for the very 
good reason that sombre colors could not but suggest gloomy 
ideas to the sick ; and he was one of the first who adopted the 
custom now universal in the profession, of dressing in the 
ordinary costume. In doing this, Dr. Boott adopted the blue 
coat, gilt buttons, and buff vest of the period, which he continued 
to wear to the last, and with which dress his casual 
acquaintance, no less than his personal friends, will ever associate 
him. In person he was so tall and thin as almost to 
suggest ill-health ; and the refinement of his manners, his expression, 
address, and bearing were in perfect keeping with 
his polished mind and many accomplishments." 
The preceding extracts are all from an excellent article in 
the " Gardeners' Chronicle " for January 16, to which we are 
much indebted. In the first volume of the late Dr. Wallich's 
splendid " Plantae Asiaticae Rariores," published in the year 
1830, is the figure of a handsome and curious Butomaceous 
plant, Boottia cordata, a genus dedicated " in honorem Francisci 
Boott, Americani, botanici ardentissimi et peritissimi, 
amici dilectissimi, non minus animi probitate quam scientiarum 
cultu, et morum suavitate egregii." 
WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER. 
Sir William Jackson Hooker died at Kew, after a 
short illness, on the 12th of August last, in the eighty-first 
year of his age. 
Seldom, if ever before, has the death of a botanist been so 
widely felt as a personal sorrow, so extended were his relations, 
and so strongly did he attach himself to all who knew 
him. By the cultivators of botany in our own country, at 
least, this statement will not be thought exaggerated. Although 
few of our botanists ever had the privilege of personally 
knowing him, there are none who are not much indebted 
to him, either directly or indirectly. It is fitting, therefore, 
that some record of his life and tribute to his memory should 
appear upon the pages of the "American Journal of Science." 
The incidents of his life are soon told. He was born on 
the 6th of July, 1785, at Norwich, England, where his father 
— who survived to even a greater age than his distinguished 
and only son — was at that period confidential clerk in a 
large business establishment. He was descended from the 
same family with " the Judicious Hooker," author of the 
" Ecclesiastical Polity." The name William Jackson was 
that of our botanist's cousin and god-father, who died young, 
and was soon followed by both his parents ; in consequence 
of which their estate of Sea-salter, near Canterbury, came to 
young Hooker while yet a lad at the Norwich High School. 
He could therefore indulge the taste which he early developed 
for natural history, at this time mainly for ornithology. But 
the chance discovery of that rare and curious moss, Buxbaumia 
aphylla, which he took to his eminent townsman Sir 
James Edward Smith, directed his attention to botany, and 
fixed the bent of his long and active life. He now made ex- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xli. 1. (1866.) 
tensive botanical tours through the wildest parts of Scotland, 
the Hebrides, and the Orkneys, which his lithe and athletic 
frame and great activity fitted him keenly to enjoy. Coming 
up to London, he made the acquaintance of Sir Joseph Banks 
and of the botanists he had drawn around him, Dryander, Solander, 
and Robert Brown. 
In 1809 he went to Iceland, to explore that then littleknown 
island. The exploration was most successful ; but the 
ship in which he embarked, with all his collections, notes, and 
drawings, was fired and destroyed, and everything was lost, 
he himself narrowly escaping with his life. Hooker's earliest 
work, the " Journal of a Tour in Iceland," in two octavo volumes, 
published at Yarmouth in 1811, and republished at 
London two years afterwards, gives an interesting account of 
his explorations and adventures, along with the history of a 
singular attempt at the time to revolutionize the island, — with 
which the disaster to the vessel he returned in was in some way 
connected, we forget how. Not disheartened by these losses, he 
now turned from a polar to an equatorial region, and made 
extensive preparations for going to Ceylon, with Sir Robert 
Brownrigg, then appointed governor. But the disturbances 
which broke out in that island, more serious than those which 
attended the close of his Iceland tour, again frustrated his 
endeavors. 
The strong disposition for travel and distant exploration, 
frustrated in his own case, came to fruit abundantly in the 
next generation, in the world-wide explorations of his son. 
He himself made no more distant journey than to Switzerland, 
Italy, and France, in 1814, becoming personally acquainted 
with the principal botanists of the day, and laying 
the foundation of his wide correspondence and great botanical 
collections. In 1815 he married the eldest daughter of the 
late Dawson Turner, of Yarmouth, and established his residence 
at Halesworth, in Suffolk. The next year, in 1816, 
besides publishing some of the Musci and Plepaticce of Humboldt 
and Bonpland's collection, he brought to completion his 
first great botanical work, " The British Jungermanniae," with 
colored figures of each species, and microscopical analyses, in 
eighty-four plates, all from his own ready pencil, — a work 
which took rank as a model both for description and illustration. 
In 1828 he brought out, in conjunction with Dr. Taylor, 
the well-known " Muscologia Britannica," the second edition 
of which, issued in 1827, is only recently superseded. The 
" Musci Exotici," with 176 admirable plates, appeared, the 
first volume in 1818, the second in 1820. These were his 
principal works upon Mosses and the like, —an excellent subject 
for the training of a botanist, and one in which Hooker, 
with quick eye, skilled hand, and intuitive judgment, was not 
only to excel but to lay the foundation of high excellence in 
general descriptive botany. 
When arranging for a prolonged visit to Ceylon, it appears 
that he sold his landed property, and that his investment of 
the proceeds was unfortunate ; so that the demands of an increasing 
family and of his enlarging collections, for which he 
always lavishly provided, made it needful for him to seek 
some remunerative scientific employment. Botanical instruction 
in Great Britain was then, more than now, nearly restricted 
to medical classes ; the botanical chairs in the universities 
therefore belonged to the medical faculty, and were 
filled by members of the profession. But, through the influence 
of Sir Joseph Banks, as is understood, the Regius Professorship 
of Botany in the University of Glasgow was offered 
to Hooker, and was accepted by him. He removed to Glasgow 
in the year 1820, and assumed the duties of this position. 
Here, for twenty years — the most productive years of 
his life —he was not only the most active and conspicuous 
working botanist of his country and time, but one of the best 
and most zealous of teachers. The fixed salary was then only 
fifty pounds ; and the class fees at first scarcely exceeded that 
sum. But his lecture-room was soon thronged with ardent 
and attached pupils, and the emoluments rose to a considerable 
sum, enabling him to build up his unrivaled herbarium, 
to patronize explorers and collectors in almost every accessible 
region, and to carry on his numerous expensive publications, 
very few of which could be at all remunerative. 
The first publication of these busy years was the " Flora 
Scotica," brought out in 1821. The next year but one 
brought the first of the three volumes of the " Exotic Flora," 
containing figures and descriptions of new, rare, or otherwise 
interesting exotic plants, admirably delineated, chiefly from 
those cultivated in the Glasgow and Edinburgh Botanic Gardens. 
Here first is manifested the interest in the flora of our 
own country, which has since identified the name of Hooker 
with North American botany, a considerable number of our 
choicest plants, especially of the Orchis family, having been 
here illustrated by his pencil. 
The " Icones Filicum " (in which he was associated with 
Dr. Greville), in two large folio volumes, with two hundred 
and forty plates, begun in 1829 and finished in 1831, was his 
introduction to the great family of Ferns, to which he in later 
years devoted his chief attention. 
In 1830 began, with the " Botanical Miscellany," that series 
of periodical publications which, continued for almost 
thirty years, stimulated the activity and facilitated the intercourse 
of botanists in no ordinary degree. The " Miscellany," 
in royal octavo, with many plates, closed with its third volume, 
in 1833. The " Journal of Botany," a continuation of the 
" Miscellany " in a cheaper form (in ordinary Bvo, issued 
monthly), took its place in 1834, but was itself superseded 
during the years 1835 and 1836 by the " Companion to the 
Botanical Magazine "(2 vols. imp. 8vo). In 1840 (after an 
interval in which the editor took charge of the botanical 
portion of Taylor's " Annals of Natural History "), the Journal 
was resumed and carried on to the fourth volume in 1842. 
Then, changed in title and enlarged, it appears as the " London 
Journal of Botany " for seven years, until 1848, and 
finally, as the " Journal of Botany and Kew Garden Miscellany," 
for nine years more, or to the close of 1857. The 
whole was carried on entirely at the editor's cost, he furnishing 
the MSS. for the letter-press, the drawings, etc., without 
charge, "so that it may be supposed that his expenses were 
heavy, while his profits were, as he always anticipated, literally 
nil." 
The plates of the Journal being too few to contain a tithe 
of the species in his herbarium which it was desirable to figure, 
an outlet for these was made by the " Icones Plantarum, 
or Figures, with brief descriptive Characters and Remarks of 
New or Rare Plants selected from the Author's Herbarium." 
Ten volumes of the work were published, with a thousand 
plates (in octavo), at the author's sole expense, and with no 
remuneration, between the years 1837 and 1854, the drawings 
of the earlier volumes by his own hand, of the later, by Mr. 
Fitch, whom he had trained to the work. 
Botanists do not need to be told how rich these journals 
are in materials illustrative of North American botany, containing 
as they do accounts of collections made by Scolder, 
Drummond, Douglas, Geyer, etc. Equally important for the 
botany of our western coast, especially of California, is " The 
Botany of Captain Beech's Voyage" (4to), in the elaboration 
of which Sir William Hooker was associated with Professor 
Walker - Arnott. But his greatest contribution to North 
American botany — for which our lasting gratitude is due — 
was his " Flora Boreali-Americana " (2 vols. 4to, with 238 
plates), of which the first part was issued in 1833, the last in 
1840. Although denominated " the botany of the Northern 
parts of British America," it embraced the whole continent 
from Canada and Newfoundland, and on the Pacific from the 
borders of California, northward to the Arctic sea. Collections 
made in the British arctic voyages had early come into 
his hands, as afterwards did all those made in the northern 
land expeditions by the late Sir John Richardson, Drummond, 
etc., and the great western collections of Douglas, 
Scolder, Tolmie, and others, while his devoted correspondents 
in the United States contributed everything they could furnish 
from this region. So that this work marks an epoch in 
North American botany, which now could be treated as a 
whole. 
We should not neglect to notice that, from the year 1827 
down to his death, he conducted that vast repertory of figures 
of the ornamental plants cultivated in Great Britain, the 
" Botanical Magazine " (contributing over 2500 plates and 
descriptions) ; a work always as important to the botanist as 
to the cultivator, and under his editorship essential to both. 
For the use of students at home, in 1830 he produced the 
"British Flora," which ran through five or six editions before 
it was consigned to his successor in the chair at Glasgow, 
Professor Arnott, who has edited two or three more. 
We have enumerated the principal works published before 
he returned to England, including those which were reedited 
or (as the periodicals) continued later. After twenty years' 
service in the Scotch University, Dr., now Sir William 
Hooker, K. H. (for in 1836 he accepted from William IV. — 
the last British sovereign who could bestow it — the honor of 
Knight of the Hanoverian Order), was appointed by government 
to take the direction of the Royal Gardens at Kew, until 
then in the private occupation of the crown, but now to be 
developed into a national scientific establishment. 
Even since the death of Banks and Dryander, and while 
Aiton, the director, grew old and lost any scientific ambition 
he may once have had, Kew Gardens had declined in botanical 
importance. The little they preserved, indeed, was chiefly 
owing to the scientific spirit and unaided exertions of Mr. 
John Smith, then a foreman, afterwards for many years the 
superintending gardener (and well known to botanists for his 
writings upon Ferns), who, retired from his labors, still survives 
to rejoice in the changed scene. 
The idea of converting Kew Gardens into a great national 
botanical establishment is thought to have originated either 
with Sir William Hooker himself, or with his powerful friend, 
and excellent patron of botany and horticulture, John, Duke 
of Bedford, the father of the present British Premier. Lord 
John Russell was in the ministry under Lord Melbourne when 
this project was pressed upon the authorities, and recommended 
to Parliament by the report of a scientific commission, 
and, succeeding to the Premiership, he had the honor of 
carrying it into execution at the propitious moment, and in 
the year 1841, of appointing Sir William Hooker to the direction 
of the new establishment. The choice could hardly 
have been different, even without such influential political 
support ; indeed his patron and friend, the Duke of Bedford, 
died two years before the appointment was made ; but Hooker's 
special fitness for the place was manifest, and his claims were 
heartily seconded by the only other botanist who could have 
come into competition with him in this respect. We refer of 
course to Dr. Lindley. The office, moreover, was no pecuniary 
prize ; the salary being only three hundred pounds a year (less, 
we believe, than the retiring pension of his unscientific super, 
annuated predecessor), " with two hundred pounds to enable 
him to rent such a house as should accommodate his herbarium 
and library, by this time of immense extent, and essential, 
we need not say, to the working of the establishment, whether 
in a scientific or economic point of view." The salary, if we 
mistake not, has since been increased in some moderate proportion 
to the enlarged responsibilities and cares of the vast 
concern ; but up to his death, so important an auxiliary as 
his unrivaled herbarium, and the greatest scientific attraction 
of the institution, was left to be supported (excepting some 
incidental aid) out of the Director's own private means. 
Such record as needs here be made of Sir William Hooker 
as Director of Kew Gardens can be best and most briefly 
given mainly in the words of a writer in the " Gardeners' 
Chronicle " for September 2d, to whose ripe judgment and 
experience we may defer. 
" Sir William entered upon his duties in command of unusual 
resources for the development of the gardens, such as 
had never been combined in any other person. Single in 
purpose and straightforward in action, enthusiastic in manner, 
and at the same time prepared to advance by degrees, he 
at once won the confidence of that branch of the government 
under which he worked. ... To those in office above him, 
he imparted much of the zeal and interest he himself felt, 
which was proved by constant visits to the gardens, resulting 
in invariable approval of what he was doing, and promises of 
aid for the future. Another means at his disposal, and which 
he at once brought to bear on the work in hand, was his extensive 
foreign and colonial correspondence, including especially 
that with a large number of students whom he had 
imbued with a love of botany, and who were scattered over 
the most remote countries of the globe, and several of whom, 
indeed, remained in more or less active correspondence with 
the Director up to the day of his death. His views were further 
greatly facilitated by his friendly intercourse with the 
foreign and colonial offices, the admiralty, and the East India 
Company, to all of whom he had the means of rendering services, 
by the recommendation of former pupils to posts in 
their employment, and by publishing the botanical results of 
the expeditions they sent out. . . . 
" At the time of Sir William's taking office, the gardens 
consisted of eleven acres, with a most imperfect and generally 
dilapidated series of ten hot-houses and conservatories. Most 
of these have since been gradually pulled clown, and, with the 
exception of the great orangery (now used as a museum for 
woods) and the large architectural house near the garden 
gates, which has just previously been removed from Buckingham 
Palace, not one now remains. They have been replaced 
by twenty-five structures (in most cases of much larger dimensions) 
exclusive of the Palm-stove and the hitherto unfinished 
great conservatory in the pleasure grounds. 
"To describe the various improvements which have resulted 
in the present establishment, — including, as it does, 
a botanic garden of seventy-five acres, a pleasure ground or 
arboretum of two hundred and seventy acres, three museums, 
stored with many thousand specimens of vegetable products, 
and a magnificent library and herbarium, the finest in Europe, 
placed in the late king of Hanover's house on one side of 
Kew Green, near the gardens,- — would rather be to give a 
history of the gardens than the life of their director." . . . 
" It might be supposed that the twenty-four years of Sir 
William's life spent at Kew in the above public improvements, 
added to the daily correspondence and superintendence 
of the gardens, would have left little time and energy 
for scientific pursuits. Such, however, was far from being 
the case. By keeping up the active habits of his early life, 
he was enabled to get through a greater amount of scientific 
work than any other botanist of his age." 
From this period his contributions to scientific botany, if 
we except the journals and illustrated works (contained until 
lately, and some of them to the last), were mainly restricted 
to his old favorites, the Ferns. Some years before he removed 
to Kew, he found the veteran Francis Bauer, then an 
octogenarian, or near it, employed in drawing under the 
microscope admirable and faithful illustrations of the fructification 
of Ferns. He arranged immediately for their publication, 
drew up the letter-press, and so brought out, between 
1838 and 1842, the well-known work entitled, " Genera Filicum, 
or illustrations of the Ferns and other allied genera." 
His large quarto, " Filices Exoticae, in colored figures and 
descriptions of exotic Ferns, chiefly of such as are cultivated 
in the Royal Gardens of Kew," (100 plates,) appeared in 
1859 ; — the drawings of these, as of nearly all his illustrated 
works for the last thirty years, by Walter Fitch, his indefatigable 
coadjutor, whom he had trained in Scotland, and who 
soon became " the most distinguished botanical artist in Europe." 
" A Second Century of Ferns " (imp. 8vo) was published 
in 1860 and 1861, the First Century being the tenth 
and closing volume of the " Icones Plantarum." 
But the principal systematic work of these later years was 
his " Species Filicum, being descriptions of the known Ferns, 
• . . accompanied with numerous figures," in five volumes, 
Bvo. The first volume of this work appeared in 1846, and 
the last only a year and a half ago. 
The crowd of new Ferns and the new knowledge which has 
accumulated in the interval of seventeen or eighteen years, 
demanded large revision and augmentation of the earlier volumes 
to bring them up to the level of the later ones. Moreover, 
a compendious work on this favorite class of plants was 
much needed. Both objects might be well accomplished by 
a synopsis of known Ferns in a single volume, to be for our 
day what Swartz's " Synopsis Filicum " was just sixty years 
ago. To this Sir William Hooker, upon the verge of fourscore, 
undauntedly turned, as soon as the last sheets of the 
" Species Filicum " passed from his hands, devoting to it 
the time that remained after attending to his administrative 
duties. Upon it he steadily labored, with unabated zeal and 
with powers almost unimpaired, conscientiously diligent and 
constitutionally buoyant to the last. He had made no small 
progress in the work, and had carried the sheets of the initial 
number through the press, when an attack of diphtheria, then 
epidemic at Kew, suddenly closed his long, honored and most 
useful life. 
Our survey of what Sir William Flooker did for science 
would be incomplete indeed, if it were confined to his published 
works — numerous and important as they are - — ■ and 
the wise and efficient administration through which, in a 
short space of twenty-four years, a Queen's flower and kitchen-garden 
and pleasure-grounds have been transformed 
into an imperial botanical establishment of unrivaled interest 
and value. Account should be taken of the spirit in which 
he worked, of the researches and explorations he promoted, 
of the aid and encouragement he extended to his fellowlaborers, 
especially to young and rising botanists, and of the 
means and appliances he gathered for their use no less than 
for his own. 
The single-mindedness with which he gave himself to his 
scientific work, and the conscientiousness with which he lived 
for science while he lived by it, were above all praise. Eminently 
fitted to shine in society, remarkably good-looking and 
of the most pleasing address, frank, cordial, and withal of 
a very genial disposition, he never dissipated his time and 
energies in the round of fashionable life, but ever avoided the 
social prominence and worldly distinctions which some sedulously 
seek. So that, however it may or ought to be regarded 
in a country where court honors and government rewards have 
a factitious importance, we count it a high compliment to his 
sense and modesty that no such distinctions were ever conferred 
upon him in recognition of all that he accomplished 
at Kew. 
Nor was there in him, while standing in a position like that 
occupied by Banks and Smith in his early days, the least 
manifestation of a tendency to overshadow the science with 
his own importance, or of indifference to its general advancement. 
Far from monopolizing even the choicest botanical 
materials which large expenditure of time and toil and money 
brought into his hands, he delighted in setting other botanists 
to work on whatever portion they wished to elaborate ; not 
only imparting freely, even to young and untried men of 
promise, the multitude of specimens he could distribute, and 
giving to all comers full access to his whole herbarium, but 
sending portions of it to distant investigators, so long as this 
could be done without too great detriment or inconvenience. 
He not only watched for opportunities for attaching botanists 
to government expeditions and voyages, and secured the publication 
of their results, but also largely assisted many private 
collectors, whose fullest sets are among the treasures of far 
the richest herbarium ever accumulated in one man's lifetime, 
if not the amplest anywhere in existence. 
One of the later and not least important services which Sir 
William Hooker has rendered to botany is the inauguration, 
through his recommendation and influence, of a plan for the 
publication, under government patronage, of the Floras of the 
different British colonies and possessions, scattered over every 
part of the world. Some of these (that of Hongkong and 
that of the British West Indies) are already completed ; 
others (like that of Australia, and the Cape Flora of Harvey 
and Sonder, adopted into the series) are in course of publication 
; and still others are ready to be commenced. 
The free and cordial way in which Hooker worked in conjunction 
with others is partly seen in the various names which 
are associated with his authorship. This came in part from 
the wide range of subjects over which his survey extended, 
a ransre which must have contributed much to the breadth of 
his views and the sureness of his judgment. Invaluable as 
such extent of study is, in the present state and prospects of 
our science we can hardly expect to see again a botanist so 
widely and so well acquainted both with Cryptogamic and 
Phanerogamic botany, or one capable of doing so much for 
the advancement and illustration of both. 
Our narrative of Sir William Hooker's scientific career 
and our estimate of his influence has, we trust, clearly, though 
incidentally, informed our readers what manner of man he 
was. To the wide circle of botanists, in which he has long 
filled so conspicuous a place, to his surviving American friends 
and correspondents, some of whom have known him long and 
well, — and "none knew him but to love him, or named him 
but to praise," — it is superfluous to say that Sir William 
Hooker was one of the most admirable of men, a model 
Christian gentleman. 
There could really be no question as to the succession to 
the charge of the great botanical establishment at Kew. But 
we may add, for the information of many of our readers, that 
the directorship vacated by Sir William's death has been 
filled by the appointment of his only surviving son, Dr. Joseph 
Dalton Hooker, whose well-established scientific fame and 
ability, no less than his lineage, may assure the continued 
equally successful administration of this most interesting and 
important trust. 
JOHN LINDLEY. 
John Lindley, one of the most renowned botanists of the 
age, died at his residence near London, on the Ist of November 
last, at the age of sixty-six years. He was born at Catton, 
near Norwich, where his father was a nurseryman, on February 
5, 1799 ; and was educated at the Norwich Grammar 
School, as was his friend and earliest scientific acquaintance, 
Sir William Hooker. It was at the house of the latter, soon 
after his removal to Halesworth, that young Lindley began 
his career of authorship by translating Richard's " Analyse 
du Fruit," which was published in 1819. He appears already 
to have devoted himself to botanical and horticultural pursuits, 
and, it is said, had arranged to visit Sumatra and the 
Malayan Islands ; but for some reason, perhaps connected 
with his father's reverses in business, the project was abandoned. 
At this juncture he was introduced by his friend 
Hooker to Sir Joseph Banks, who employed him as his assistant 
librarian. Sir Joseph recommended him to Mr. Cattley, 
for whom he edited the folio " Collectanea Botanica," illustrating 
some of the new and curious plants cultivated in Mr. 
Cattley's collection. He had already published his " Monograph 
of Roses " (1820) and his " Monograph of Digitalis " 
(1821), the latter illustrated by plates from Ferdinand 
Bauer's drawings. The next year (1822) began his connection 
with the Horticultural Society, as garden assistant secretary, 
when he took charge of the laying out of the garden 
at Chiswick. In 1826 he became sole assistant secretary, 
Mr. Sabine being honorary secretary until 1830, and then 
Mr. Bentham until 1841 ; nearly the whole active charge of 
the establishment falling upon Dr. Lindley. Then, as vicesecretary 
he conducted the operations of this great and pros- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xli. 265. (1866.) 
perous society, with almost undivided responsibility until 
1858, when, dropping the laboring oar, he became secretary 
and member of the council, and took a leading part in the 
reorganization of the society, until, fairly broken down by 
overwork, in 1862 he was obliged to retire from the management. 
Besides his work in the Horticultural Society, sufficient 
in itself to task any ordinary powers, Dr. Lindley was 
professor of botany in University College from 1829 to 1861, 
giving elaborate courses of lectures every year, and also lecturer 
at the Apothecaries Garden at Chelsea for nearly the 
same period. He conducted the "Botanical Register" from 
about 1823 (although his name does not appear upon the 
title-page until somewhat later) down to its close in 1847 ; 
he did the principal botanical work in Loudon's " Encyclopedia 
of Plants," and wrote the botanical articles for the 
" Penny Cyclopedia," down to the letter R ; contributed to 
the Transactions and Proceedings of the Horticultural Society, 
and edited its Journal ; prepared the later volumes of Sibthorp's 
magnificent "Flora Graeca," etc., etc.; besides writing 
and often reediting his numerous classical botanical works, 
which, with his lectures to successive classes of pupils inspired 
by his own ardor, have made his name so famous wherever 
botany is cultivated. Of these numerous works we can mention 
only the principal. Flis " Synopsis of the British Flora" 
arranged according to the Natural Orders, first issued in 1829, 
has only a local and historical interest, as a part of his successful 
endeavors to introduce and popularize the natural 
system in England, where it had peculiar obstacles to contend 
against. Flis " Genera and Species of Orchidaceous Plants," 
with his " Sertum Orchidaceum," and, later, his " Folia 
Orchidacea" (which he was able only to commence), embody 
a portion of his labors upon an important and curious family 
of plants, upon which he became the paramount authority. 
His " Introduction to Botany," which ran through four editions, 
his outlines of the " First Principles of Botany," at 
length expanded into his " Elements of Botany," and his 
" School Botany," form a series of introductory works which 
have done much more for botanical instruction than any others 
in the English language. By his " Flora Medica "he supplied 
to medical students a good botanical account of all the more 
important plants used in medicine. By his "Theory of Florticulture," 
explaining the principal operations of gardening 
upon physiological principles, in connection with his articles . 
upon the subject in the " Gardeners' Chronicle," he may 
almost be said to have raised this branch of knowledge " from 
the conditions of an empirical art to that of a developed 
science." And, finally, in his " Introduction to the Natural 
System of Botany," the first edition of which, published in 
1830, was the earliest systematic exposition of the natural 
system in the English language, or fairly available to English 
and American students, and his further development of this 
work into his classical " Vegetable Kingdom," — the one book 
which may take the place of a botanical library, — Dr. Lindley 
made his most important contributions to the advancement 
of systematic botany. The coming generation of botanists 
cannot be expected to appreciate the vast influence exerted 
by the earlier of these works in its day ; the latter, however 
open to adverse criticism in particulars, is still unrivaled and 
is probably " that by which his name will be best known to 
posterity." Physiologist, morphologist, and systematist, he 
displayed equal genius in all these departments of the science, 
but he worked too rapidly to do himself full justice in any of 
them. " His power of work was indeed astonishing ; whatever 
he undertook (and his undertakings were wonderful in 
amount and variety) he did with the utmost conscientiousness, 
never flagging until he had done it ; and he was a splendid 
example of what can be accomplished by a man of strong will, 
habitually acting up to his oft-repeated saying, that to method, 
zeal, and perseverance nothing is impossible." "Until he had 
passed fifty years of age," it is stated that "he never knew 
what it was to feel tired either in body or mind." Such persons 
are sure to be overtasked. The Great Exhibition of 1851, 
adding protracted and onerous duties to his ordinary work, 
prostrated him with serious illness ; the Second Exhibition, 
in 1862, in which he took charge of the whole colonial department, 
fatally injured his bodily and mental powers, and 
cut short his scientific career. He was able, however, to enjoy 
the society of his immediate friends and to keep up an interest 
in his favorite pursuits quite to the close, which occurred from 
an apoplectic attack, on the morning of the Ist of November 
, last. 
Dr. Lindley was a man of marked character. While his 
biographer declared that "he was hot in temper and impatient 
of opposition," he no less truly adds that, " on the other 
hand, he had the warmest of hearts and the most generous of 
dispositions." He seemed as incapable of cherishing a resentment, 
as of repressing the expression of indignation for what 
he thought wrong ; and if at times he made enemies, he was 
almost sure in time to convert his enemies into friends. 
WILLIAM HENRY HARVEY. 
William Henry Harvey was born at Summerville, near 
Limerick, Ireland, on the sth of February, 1811. His father, 
Joseph M. Harvey, was a highly respected merchant in that 
city and a member of the Society of Friends. William Henry 
was, we believe, the youngest of several children. He received 
a good education at Ballitore school, —an institution of the 
Friends, — and on leaving it was engaged for a time in his father's 
counting-room, devoting, however, all his spare •time to 
natural history, his favorite pursuit even from boyhood. He 
made considerable attainments in entomology and conchology, 
and in botany he early turned his attention to Mosses and 
Algce. To the study of the latter, in which he became preeminent, 
he was attracted from the first by the opportunities 
which he enjoyed on the productive western coast of Ireland, 
the family usually spending a good part of the summer at the 
seaside, mostly on the bold and picturesque shore of Clare. 
As the late Sir William Hooker's bent for botany was fixed 
by his accidental discovery of a rare moss, which he took to 
Sir J. E. Smith, so in turn was Flarvey's, by his discovery of 
two new habitats of another rare moss, the PPooheria ketevirens, 
which led to a correspondence with Hooker, and to 
a life-long mutual attachment of these most excellent men. 
Encouraged by his illustrious friend and patron, Harvey 
sought some position in which he might devote himself to science 
; and it would appear was selected by Mr. Spring Rice 
(the late Lord Monteagle) for the post of colonial treasurer 
at the Cape of Good Hope ; that by some accident the 
appointment was made out in the name of an elder brother, 
and an inopportune change of ministry frustrated all attempts 
at rectification. There was no other way but for the brother 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xlii. 273. (1866.) 
to accept the undesigned appointment, and to take the young 
botanist with him to the Cape as his assistant. This was done, 
and the brothers sailed for that colony in the year 1835. But 
the health of the elder brother suddenly and hopelessly failed 
within a year, and he died in 1836 on the passage home. 
William Harvey's appointment to succeed his brother had 
been sent to the Cape while he was on his homeward voyage : 
he immediately returned to his post, and fulfilled its duties for 
three years, devoting his mornings to collecting and his nights 
to botanical investigation, with such assiduity that his health 
also gave way, and he was compelled to return home in 1839. 
The summer of the next year found him reestablished and on 
his way to the Cape for the third time. But he could not 
long endure the sultry climate and the intense application ; 
with broken health he came back in 1841 and gave up the 
appointment. 
After two years of prostration and seclusion he was well 
again ; and in 1844, on the death of Dr. Coulter, he was appointed 
keeper of the herbarium of Trinity College, Dublin. 
The most important portion of the herbarium then consisted 
of the collections, yet unassorted, made by Coulter in northwestern 
Mexico and California. Harvey generously added 
his own large collections, for which he was allowed fifty 
pounds a year, in addition to a slender salary, and he proceeded 
to build up the herbarium into a first-class establishment. 
The professorship of botany in the college, which 
was pretty well endowed, fell vacant about this time ; and the 
college authorities, wishing to elect Harvey to the chair and 
so to combine the two offices, conferred upon him the necessary 
degree of M. D. But it was contended that an honorary 
degree did not meet the requirements, and so Dr. Allman, the 
present distinguished professor of natural history at Edinburgh, 
carried the election. 
Except for the slenderness of his salary, Dr. Flarvey was 
now well placed for scientific work, the object to which he 
wished to devote his life ; and he entered upon and pursued 
his distinguished career henceforth with an entire and welldirected 
energy that never flagged until he was prostrated by 
mortal disease. 
He had already published, at the Cape, in 1838, his " Genera 
of South African Plants," hastily prepared, solely for 
local use, but no unworthy beginning of his work in Phaenogamous 
botany ; and in his favorite department of the science 
he had brought out, in 1841, his " Manual of British Algae," 
which he reedited in 1849. He now commenced the first of 
the series of his greatest works, illustrated by his facile 
pencil, for he drew admirably. The first (monthly) part of 
his excellent and beautiful " Phycologia Britannica, a History 
of British Seaweeds," containing colored figures of all the 
species inhabiting the shores of the British Islands, appeared 
in January, 1846 ; and the undertaking was completed in 
1851 in three (or four) volumes, with three hundred and sixty 
plates, all drawn on stone by his own hand. A similar but 
less extended work, the " Nereis Australia, or Algae of the 
Southern Ocean," which was begun in 1847, was carried only 
to fifty plates of selected and beautiful species. 
In 1848, Dr. Flarvey succeeded Dr. Litton as professor of 
botany in the Royal Dublin Society, to which belonged the 
botanic garden at Glasnevin ; this required him to deliver 
short courses of lectures annually in Dublin or some other 
Irish town, and provided a welcome addition to his income. 
In 1848, at the request of his friend Van Voorst, the publisher, 
he wrote his charming little volume, " The Seaside 
Book," the unsurpassed model of that class of popular scientific 
books ; it was published in 1849, and has passed through 
several editions. In July of that year, having arranged a 
visit to this country, and having been invited to deliver a 
course of lectures before the Lowell Institute, he took steamer 
for Halifax and Boston, passed the summer and autumn in 
exploring the shores of the northern States, and in the society 
of his friends and relatives ; for the late Mr. Jacob Harvey, 
still well and pleasantly remembered in New York, who 
married the daughter of Dr. Hosack, was his elder brother. 
In the autumn he gave an admirable course of lectures upon 
Cryptogamic botany before the Lowell Institute in Boston, 
and afterwards a shorter course at the Smithsonian Institution 
at Washington. He then traveled in the southern At- 
lantic States, continuing the exploration of our Algce down 
to Florida and the Keys ; and in May, 1850, he returned to 
Ireland. Under the wise and liberal arrangements made by 
Professor Henry in behalf of the Smithsonian Institution, 
and with his own large collections augmented by the contributions 
which every student or lover of Algce was glad to place 
in such worthy hands, Professor Harvey now prepared his 
" Nereis Boreali- Americana, or Contributions to a History of 
the Marine Algae of North America." The work is a systematic 
account of all the known Marine Algce of North 
America, but with figures only of the leading species. It was 
issued in three parts : the first part, the Melanospermem, in 
1852, in the third volume of the Smithsonian Contributions to 
Knowledge ; the second, Rhodospermece, in the fifth volume ; 
and the third, or Chlorospermece, in the tenth volume of the 
series, published in 1858 ; and the three parts, collected for 
separate issue, compose a thick imperial quarto volume, of 
five hundred and fifty pages of letter-press and fifty plates. 
The work remains the principal if not the only guide to the 
American student of Algce, and one of the most popular as 
well as useful of the various contributions to knowledge 
which the well-managed bequest of Smithson has given to 
the world. 
Before the last part of the "Nereis Boreali- Americana " 
was published, Professor Harvey had sought a wider field of 
scientific labor and observation. Obtaining a long leave of 
absence, and some assistance from the University in addition 
to the continuance of his salary, he left England in August, 
1853, by the overland route for Australia, stopping at Aden 
and Ceylon to collect : he visited the east, south, and west 
coasts of Australia, as well as Tasmania. Taking advantage 
of a missionary ship, which was to cruise among the South Sea 
Islands, and which offered him unexpected facilities, he visited 
the Fiji, Navigators', and Friendly Islands, touching also 
at New Zealand. Returning to Sydney, he sailed to Valparaiso, 
which he reached much prostrated through over-exertion 
in a warm climate ; and when recuperated he returned 
home by way of the Isthmus, arriving in October, 
1856. The algological collections of these three laborious 
years, or the Australian portion of them, formed the subject 
of Professor Harvey's third great illustrated work, and one of 
the most exquisite of the kind, the " Phycologia Australica," 
the serial publication of which began in 1858 and was concluded 
in 1863, in five imperial octavo volumes, each of sixty 
colored plates. All but the last century of plates were put 
upon stone by the author. 
Upon Dr. Harvey's return in 1856 from his long expedition 
he found the chair of botany in the University of Dublin 
vacated by the appointment of Dr. Allman to that of natural 
history in the University of Edinburgh ; and he was at once 
preferred to the position which he had sought when younger 
and freer, and which he now occupied till his death. The exhausting 
duties of this chair, and of that which he still held in 
the Royal Dublin Society, undiminished by the transference 
to the government Museum of Irish Industry, did not prevent 
Professor Harvey from entering with unabated ardor 
upon an undertaking of greater magnitude than any preceding 
one. This was the " Flora Capensis," a full systematic 
account of all the plants of the Cape Colony and the adjacent 
provinces of Caffraria and Natal, —in which he was associated 
with Dr. Sonder of Hamburg. Three thick octavo 
volumes of this work have appeared, the last in 1865, including 
the Compositce. Along with this Dr. Harvey — learning 
for the purpose another form of lithographic drawing — 
brought out, between the years 1859 and 1864, two volumes 
of his " Thesaurus Capensis, or Illustrations of the South 
African Flora," comprising two hundred plates of interesting 
phaenogamous plants. A complete list of bis publications 
would include several contributions to scientific periodicals, 
mainly to " Hooker's Journal of Botany," and a few miscellaneous 
writings. 
In April, 1861, Dr. Harvey married Miss Phelps of Limerick. 
If not robust, he was apparently in good health, in the 
full maturity of his powers, and it was hoped only at the 
noonday of his allotted course of usefulness. But ere the lecture 
season of that summer was over, an attack of hemorrhage 
from the lungs gave notice of a serious pulmonary disease. 
Yet he seemed to recover from this almost completely : he 
resumed his stated work, and gave his lectures as usual in 
1863, and also in the spring of the following year, but with 
some difficulty. The winter and spring of 1864-65 were 
spent in the south of France, with only transient benefit. 
Returning to his home and his herbarium, he worked on still 
at the Cape Flora, with cheerful spirit but feeble hands, until 
he could work no longer. Last spring he sought in Devonshire 
a milder air, and found a peaceful rest. "On Tuesday, 
the 15th of May, 1866, at the age of fifty-five years, he quietly 
breathed his last, at the residence of Lady Hooker, the 
widow of his long-attached friend Sir William J. Flooker, 
surrounded by kind and anxious relatives and friends, and 
was buried in the cemetery at Torquay on Saturday, the 19th 
of May." 
Mr. Harvey was one of the few botanists of our day who 
excelled both in Phaenogamic and Cryptogamic botany. In 
Algology, his favorite branch, he left probably no superior ; 
in systematic botany generally he had won an eminent position. 
He was a keen observer and a capital describer. He 
investigated accurately, worked readily and easily with microscope, 
pencil, and pen, wrote perspicuously, and where the 
subject permitted, with captivating grace, affording, in his 
lighter productions, mere glimpses of the warm and poetical 
imagination, delicate humor, refined feeling, and sincere goodness 
which were charmingly revealed in intimate intercourse 
and correspondence, and which won the admiration and the 
love of all who knew him well. Handsome in person, gentle 
and fascinating in manners, genial and warm-hearted, but of 
very retiring disposition, simple in his tastes and unaffectedly 
devout, it is not surprising that he attracted friends wherever 
he went, so that his death will be sensibly felt on every continent 
and in the islands of the sea. 
HENRY P. SARTWELL. 
Dr. Henry P. Sartwell died at Penn Yan, New York, 
on the 15th of November, at the age of seventy-five years. 
He was, we believe, indigenous to the western part of the 
state of New York, and when a medical student resided at 
Gorham, Ontario County. More than forty years ago he was 
established as a physician in the neighboring town of Penn 
Yan, where he passed his honorable and useful life, engaged 
to the last in the practice of his profession. It is said that 
the illness of which he died was brought on by over-exertion 
in attendance at the bedside of a sick friend. He was fond 
of all branches of natural history, and a diligent observer and 
collector in more than one ; but in botany he has secured an 
enduring reputation. He was in his way a model local botanist. 
He thoroughly explored the district within his reach ; 
he prepared admirable specimens in great numbers, and distributed 
them with a free hand. Few botanists in this country 
have contributed to so many herbaria, home or foreign, 
none more disinterestedly and generously. He accumulated 
a large herbarium, specially rich and attractive in plants of 
western New York, in Carices and Ferns. Desirous of insuring 
its preservation and future usefulness, and needing in his 
old age the very moderate sum which it would bring him, he 
a few years ago transferred his herbarium to Hamilton College, 
where it is valued and well cared for. Most local botanists, 
when they have nearly exhausted the resources of the 
district they are confined to, are liable to sink into inactivity. 
Dr. Sartwell avoided this destiny, and prolonged to the last 
his enjoyment and usefulness, by making a specialty of the 
great genus Carex. Dewey, Torrey, Tuckerman, Carey, 
Boott, all who have published within the last thirty years 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts. 2 ser., xlv. 121. (1868.) 
upon this genus, have had frequent occasion to acknowledge 
their obligations to him ; and he erected for himself a monument 
of his zeal and devotion, and a testimony to his powers 
of observation, in his " Carices Americas Septentrionalis Exsiccatae," 
the first part of which was issued in the year 1848, 
the second in 1850 ; while his interest and activity in the 
study continued with little abatement down to the last year 
or two. He published nothing else, we believe, excepting a 
" Catalogue of the Plants growing in the vicinity of Penn 
Yan " ; but he contributed no little to the value of the publications 
of others, especially to those of the writer of this 
notice, and to the "Flora of the State of New York." The 
Carex which had been dedicated to Dr. Sartwell has proved 
to be identical with an old European species, but a very distinct 
and peculiar genus of Compositce found in southwestern 
Texas, keeps up the name of Sartwellia. His most intimate 
associate in caricological study survived him only one month. 
CHESTER DEWEY. 
Professor Chester Dewey died at Rochester, New 
York, December 13, having completed the eighty-third year 
of his age. "He was born at Sheffield, Massachusetts, October 
25, 1784 ; was graduated at Williams College in 1806 ; 
studied for the ministry ; was licensed to preach in 1808, 
and during the latter half of that year officiated in Tyringham 
in western Massachusetts. The same year he accepted 
a tutorship in Williams College, and in 1810 was appointed 
professor of mathematics and natural philosophy, an office 
which he discharged for seventeen years. During his connection 
with the college he did much to advance the standard 
of scholarship and enlarge the course of study in his own and 
kindred departments. Between 1827 and 1836 he was principal 
of the ' Gymnasium,' a high school for boys at Pittsfield, 
Massachusetts. In the latter year he removed to this 
city (Rochester), and became principal of the Rochester 
Collegiate Institute, which post he held until 1850, when he 
was elected professor of chemistry and natural philosophy in 
the Rochester University. He was actively engaged in the 
duties of that position till 1860, when he retired at the age of 
seventy-seven, though he continued to teach to some extent 
till his eightieth year. The last four years he has passed in 
easy and dignified retirement, happy in the society of his family 
and friends, beloved and respected by all, and occupying 
himself still with his scientific studies and with meteorological 
observations, which he conducted with great care and regularity." 

Dr. Dewey was an early and a frequent contributor to this 
Journal, upon several subjects, but especially upon that with 
which his name is inseparably connected, the Carices of 
North America. His " Cartography," commenced in 1824, 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xlv. 122. (1868.) 
was continued year after year with few breaks, down to the 
close of 1866, when it terminated with a general Index to 
Species. It is not for us to speak particularly of the merits 
of this elaborate monograph, patiently prosecuted through 
more than forty years. This and the monograph of Schweinitz 
and Torrey laid the foundation and insured the popularity 
of the study of Sedges in this country. But while the 
latter systematic arrangement was published as a whole in 
1825, Dr. Dewey's, carried on without particular order, extended 
through a lifetime, and represents both the earlier and 
the later knowledge. What is needed to render these stores 
of observation and their permanent results most available, is 
a systematic digest or synopsis, something like that which the 
author contributed to Wood's Botany, in the article Carex, 
but with all the more important references. Hopes were 
entertained that he might be able to crown his life's work 
in this way. But at past fourscore and ten this could not 
be expected. Beyond this favorite genus, Professor Dewey's 
botanical writings were few ; the most considerable was his 
" History of the Herbaceous Plants of Massachusetts," published 
under the authority of the State, being the companion 
volume to the better known " Report on the Trees and Shrubs," 
by Mr. Emerson. Botany was one of the occupations of Professor 
Dewey's leisure hours ; his long life was mainly devoted 
to education. Turning his attention to a special yet 
almost inexhaustible subject, however, and laboring perseveringly 
and faithfully, although under many disadvantages, he 
has permanently and honorably impressed his name upon the 
science in which the Californian Umbelliferous genus Deweya 
records his services. Fie was an excellent, simple-hearted, 
devout man, a fine specimen of the western New Englander 
of the old school. 
The lovers of Carex, so numerous in this country, will 
cherish the memory of these two venerable men, Sartwell and 
Dewey, long associated in congenial pursuits, and gone to 
their rest together. May the turf of the Sedges they loved, 
and which cover or ought to cover the low mounds under 
which their dust reposes, keep them perennially green, and 
adorn them each returning spring with their sober blossoms ! 
GEORGE A. WALKER-ARNOTT. 1 
George A. Walker-Arnott, Professor of Botany in the 
University at Glasgow, died on the 17th of June last, in 
the seventieth year of his age. Fie was born in Edinburgh, 
February 6, 1799, educated at the celebrated high school of 
that city, and at the university, where he took high rank as a 
scholar, especially in the mathematics, — publishing two 
papers in Tilloch's "Philosophical Magazine" in 1817 and 
1818, while yet a student in arts, — and then, turning to law 
studies, he was called to the bar as a member of the faculty of 
advocates in the year 1821. He hardly entered, however, upon 
the duties of his profession, his taste for natural history having 
been early developed under the lectures of Professor Jameson 
and of Mr. Stewart, — the latter a well-known teacher of 
botany at that time, and his patrimonial estate of Arlary in 
Kinros-shire suffering for his support, so that he could devote 
himself to botany, as he did, with unsurpassed ardor and 
success. His earliest botanical paper, upon some Brazilian 
Mosses, was written in France, and published in a journal 
at Paris in 1823. In 1826 and 1827 he contributed to the 
" Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal " a lively narrative 
of a botanical tour to the south of France and the Pyrenees. 
He resided for some time at Montpellier and in Paris, examining 
the principal herbaria there, also that of De Candolle 
at Geneva, and in 1828 the herbaria at St. Petersburg. In 
1831 he married and established himself with his collections 
at Arlary, where he resided until, in 1845, he accepted the 
professorship of botany in the University of Glasgow. It was 
during these fourteen years that the vast amount of scientific 
work he was able to accomplish was mainly done. He wrote 
the article " Botany" in the seventh edition of the " Encyclo- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xlvii. 140. (1869.) 
pedia Britannica," — the best treatise of the kind of its day in 
the English language, and one of the most influential. In 
conjunction with his early friend, Sir William Hooker, he 
wrote the " Contributions to the Flora of South America," 
etc., which form a long series of articles in the " Botanical 
Miscellany," "Journal of Botany," and other similar periodical 
or serial publications edited by Sir William. He took a 
similar part in the " Botany of Beechcy's Voyage " ; in connection 
with Dr. Wight he brought out the first volume of the 
" Prodromus Florae Peninsulas Indite Orientalis " ; and made 
numerous contributions to various periodicals. Up to 1845 
or somewhat later Dr. Arnott was one of the foremost botanists 
of the time, one of the most zealous and sagacious, versed 
alike in European and exotic botany. But upon assuming the 
duties of his chair at Glasgow he appears soon to have abandoned 
the field in which he had won the highest honors, and 
in which much more was justly expected. Fie assumed, however, 
the joint authorship of Hooker's " British Flora," taking, 
we believe, the whole charge and responsibility of the later 
editions. As he began with Mosses, so for the last fifteen or 
twenty years of his life he devoted himself principally to the 
PMatomacece, bringing to their investigation all the ardor of 
his nature and the keenest powers of observation, combined 
with indomitable patience and unwearied care. So that he 
became in this department of microscopical research one of 
the highest authorities, and amassed one of the richest collections 
extant. As a professor he was greatly esteemed and 
respected, although he may be thought to have come almost 
too late in life to the professor's chair. In his later years he 
was much withdrawn from general botanical intercourse ; but 
his surviving correspondents and friends on this side of the 
ocean cherish very pleasant memories of him. 
NATHANIEL BAGSHAW WARD. 
Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward, Fellow of the Royal and Linnaean 
societies, after whom, as its inventor, the Wardian case 
is named, died at the ripe age of seventy-seven years, on the 4th 
of June last. He was born in the east end of London, where 
his father was a medical practitioner of repute, and where for 
the greater part of his busy and most useful life he laboriously 
devoted himself to the same profession. About twenty years 
ago he exchanged the smoke-charged atmosphere and dingy 
dwellings of Wellclose Square for the pleasant and airy 
suburb of Clapham Rise, but still actively engaged almost to 
the last in professional practice, and in his various official 
duties, mainly in connection with the Apothecaries Society, 
filling in succession nearly all its important offices. The renovation 
and even the maintenance of the celebrated Apothecaries 
Garden at Chelsea — the oldest botanical establishment 
of the country —is probably mainly due to his counsels and 
exertions. We cannot here enter into the interesting history 
of the now familiar Wardian case, — a discovery which grew 
out of Mr. Ward's persistent endeavors to cultivate the plants 
he delighted in under the smoke and soot of the dingiest part 
of London, and which resulted in providing for the poor as 
well as the rich denizens of the smoky towns of the old world 
the inexpensive but invaluable luxury or comfort of being surrounded 
at all seasons with growing plants and fresh flowers. 
Nor is the invention less applicable to house-culture, especially 
of Ferns, under the clearer and purer air of our own country 
rendered arid by the cold of winter, as hundreds could testify 
who have enjoyed the benefit, perhaps without knowing even 
the name of their benefactor. Equally important is the application 
of the Wardian case to the conveyance of living plants 
between distant countries. The writer well remembers the 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 2 ser., xlvii. 141. (1869.) 
first case of growing plants sent to New York thirty-five years 
ago, which arrived as fresh and healthy as when they left 
London ; and the transmission was quite successful between 
England and Australia, when the voyage, confined to sailingships, 
was far longer than now. So useful has this contrivance 
proved to be in this respect, that the director of Kew 
Gardens " feels safe in saying that a large proportion of the 
most valuable economic and other tropical plants now cultivated 
in England would, but for these cases, not yet have 
been introduced." The earliest published account of the Wardian 
case was given by Mr. Ward in the form of a letter to 
his near friend, the late Sir William Hooker, and was printed 
in the " Companion to the Botanical Magazine " for May, 
1836. His volume "On the Growth of Plants in Closely 
Glazed Cases " appeared in the year 1842, and a second edition, 
considerably enlarged and suitably illustrated, was published 
a few years later. These were, we believe, Mr. Ward's 
only scientific publications, excepting reports of communications 
to various societies with which he was connected, several 
of them relating to a subject near to his heart: the improvement 
of the dwellings of the poor in England, and the amelioration, 
in other respects, of their hard condition. A most 
enthusiastic and, in some departments, a learned botanist, his 
contributions to his favorite avocation were not in the form of 
authorship, to which he seemed averse : a man " given to hospitality 
" indeed, but as unpretending as it was cordial and 
unlimited. The coming generation will hardly appreciate the 
extent of the influence he exerted and the strength of the 
attachment he inspired so widely among the cultivators of 
natural science, nor understand, perhaps, how it could be 
said of him, and without exaggeration, that " for very many 
years his hospitable house, first in Wellclose Square, and latterly 
at Clapham Rise, was the most frequented metropolitan 
resort of naturalists from all quarters of the globe of any 
since Sir Joseph Banks' day." But while any survive of those 
who have had the privilege of knowing him personally, or in 
the friendly correspondence he delighted in, Mr. Ward will 
be remembered as " one of the gentlest, kindest, and purest," 
and in the highest sense one of the best of men. 
MOSES ASHLEY CURTIS. 
Moses Ashley Curtis was born in Stockbridge, Massa 
chusetts, on the 11th of May, 1808. His father was the Rev 
Jared Curtis, of Stockbridge, afterward for many years chap 
lain of the state prison at Charlestown. His mother was ,\ 
daughter of General Moses Ashley. He was fitted for cob 
lege chiefly under his father's tuition, and was graduated at 
Williams in the class of 1827. Three years afterward he 
went to Wilmington, North Carolina, as a tutor in the family 
of Governor Dudley, while at the same time he studied divinity. 
There he resided until the year 1841, with the exception 
of a year and a half passed with his father in Charlestown. 
In the autumn of 1834 he married Miss De Rosset, of Wilmington, 
who survives him. He took holy orders at Richmond, 
Virginia, in the summer of 1835 ; became rector of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church at Hillsborough, North Carolina, 
in 1841, and fulfilled the duties of this station for the remainder 
of his life, with the exception of ten years, from 1847 
to 1857, during which he had the jiastoral charge of a parish 
at Society Hill, South Carolina. The degree of Doctor of 
Divinity was conferred on him by the University of North 
Carolina, at Chapel Hill. His health for a few years past 
was sensibly impaired ; but he was able to perform his professional 
duties, and, in a measure, to prosecute his scientific 
studies, until the 10th of April last, when he died suddenly, 
probably of heart-disease. 
Dr. Curtis's attention must have early been attracted to 
botany, and his predilection fixed by his residence at Wilmington, 
one of the richest and most remarkable botanical 
stations in the United States. For it was in the year 1843, 
after only three years' residence there, that he communicated 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., v. 391. (1873.) 
to the Boston Society of Natural Flistory his first botanical 
work, namely, his "Enumeration of Plants growing spontaneously 
around Wilmington, North Carolina, with remarks 
on some New and Obscure Species." This was printed in the 
first volume and second number of that society's Journal ; 
but the original impression having been mainly destroyed by 
fire, important additions and emendations were made in the 
subsequent reprint. The author's powers of observation and 
aptitude for research are well shown in this publication, and 
it is one of the first of the kind in this country in which the 
names are accented. In his note upon the structure of Dionaea, 
or Venus's Fly-trap, — a plant found only in the district 
around Wilmington, — Dr. Curtis corrected the account of 
the mode of its wonderful action which had prevailed since 
the time of Linnaeus, and confirmed the statement and inferences 
of the first scientific describer, Ellis, namely, that this 
plant not only captures insects, but consumes them, enveloping 
them in a mucilaginous fluid which appears to act as a 
solvent. Extending his botanical observations to the western 
borders of his adopted State, Dr. Curtis was among the first 
to retrace the steps and rediscover the plants found and published 
by the elder Michaux, in the higher Alleghany Mountains. 
But for the last twenty-five years his scientific studies 
were mainly given to mycology, in which he became a proficient, 
and the highest American authority. His papers upon 
Fungi, some of which are large, and all are important, were 
mainly published by the American Philosophical Society, and 
by the Linnaean Society of London. Several of them are the 
joint productions of Dr. Curtis and the able English mycologist 
Mr. Berkley. 
His other published writings mainly are " A Commentary 
on the Natural History of Dr. Hawks's ' History of North 
Carolina,' " — a good specimen of his appreciation of exact 
research and of sharpness of wit without acerbity ; two papers 
in Silliman's Journal on " New and Rare Plants of the Carolmas 
" ; and the botanical portion of the " Geological and Natural 
History Survey of North Carolina," in two parts ; — the 
first a popular account of the trees and shrubs, issued in 
1860 ; the other, a catalogue of all the plants of the State, in 
1867. This includes the lower Cryptogamia, especially the 
Fungi, of which he enumerates almost 2400 species, while the 
phaenogamous plants are less than 1900. All our associate's 
work was marked by ability and conscientiousness. With a 
just appreciation both of the needs of the science and of what 
he could best do under the circumstances, when he had exhausted 
the limited field in Phaenogamous botany within his 
reach, he entered upon the inexhaustible ground of mycology, 
which had been neglected in this country since the time of 
Schweinitz. In this difficult department he investigated and 
published a large number of new species, as well as determined 
the old ones, and amassed an ample collection, the preservation 
of which is most important, comprising as it does the specimens, 
drawings, and original notes which are to authenticate 
his work. By his unremitting and well-directed labors, filling 
the intervals of an honored and faithful professional life, he 
has richly earned the gratitude of the present and ensuing 
generations of botanists. Several years ago he prepared 
drawings of the edible Fungi of the country, with a view to 
making them better known in an accessible and popular publication 
; but he was unable to find a publisher. He was much 
impressed with their importance as a source of food. During 
the hardships of the Rebellion he turned his knowledge of 
them to useful account for his family and neighborhood ; and 
he declared that he could have supported a regiment upon 
excellent and delicious food which was wasting in the fields 
and woods around him. 
HUGO VON MOHL. 
Hugo VON Mohl, the acknowledged chief of the vegetable 
anatomists of this generation, died on the first day of April 
last. He was born at Stuttgart, April 8, 1805, the youngest 
of four brothers who all became men of mark in political and 
scientific life ; Julius the orientalist and Flugo the botanist 
being the most distinguished. The latter was educated at the 
Stuttgart Gymnasium and Tubingen University, where he 
studied medicine as well as natural history and physics. His 
first publication, while a student, in the year 1827, was his 
" Essay on the Structure and Coiling of Tendrils and Twiners," 
written in response to a prize-question offered by the 
Tubingen Medical Faculty. In it he divined the real nature 
of the movements which coiling stems and tendrils execute, as 
has recently been clearly made out. In the following year 
appeared his inaugural dissertation on the " Pores of the Cellular 
Tissue of Plants," in which his later views and discoveries, 
respecting the structure, growth, and component parts of cells, 
as subsequently developed, are already foreshadowed. About 
this time his choice was made for a scientific rather than a 
medical career; and he went to Munich to prosecute more 
advantageously his favorite studies. Here the late Von Martius 
and Zuccarni were his botanical masters, and Agassiz, 
Karl Schimper, Braun, and Engelmann his fellow-students. 
Here he made those researches upon the anatomy of Ferns, 
Cycads, and especially of Palms, — the latter a most important 
contribution to Martius's great work upon Palms, the former 
also contributed to another work by Martius, — which first 
displayed his remarkable talents for histological investigation, 
to^ which his subsequent scientific life was mainly devoted. 
His merits were promptly recognized by a call to the Imperial 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., v. 393. (1873.) 
Botanic Garden of St. Petersburg, as assistant to its director, 
Dr. Fischer, and to the chair of physiology in the Academy of 
Berne. He accepted the latter in 1832, and occupied it until 
1835. Then, upon the death of Schubler, he returned to 
Tubingen, accepted the professorship of botany in its hio-li 
school, in which chair and in that of Tubingen the rest of 
his life was passed. Invitations to more prominent and lucrative 
positions, as, for example, to the botanical chair at Berlin 
University, when vacated by the death of the veteran Link, 
were unhesitatingly declined. Although he published numerous 
(about ninety) special papers or articles, most of them 
important and timely, and some of great pith and moment, 
he resolutely declined to bring out any general work. His 
" Mikrographie " (1846) and his "Principles of the Anatomy 
and Physiology of the Vegetable Cell " are his only writings 
which may claim to be such. The latter, an admirable and 
still invaluable treatise, appeared as an article in Rudolf 
Wagner's " Cyclopaedia of Physiology," but is best known to 
English readers in its separate form, in a translation made by 
the late Professor Henfrey, with the author's sanction, issued 
by Van Voorst in 1852. A year or two later it was for a 
time understood, to the great satisfaction of botanists, that 
Mohl had agreed to take a prominent part in the production 
of a general manual of the anatomy and physiology of plants ; 
hut his promise was soon withdrawn. For thirty years he was 
one of the editors of the " Botanische Zeitung " ; but the editorial 
labor must have devolved mainly upon Schlechtendal 
and his successor, although occasional articles from Mold's 
Pen appeared as late as the year 1871. During that year 
his health became seriously impaired; yet as the new year 
advanced, apprehension disappeared. Upon Easter Monday 
he was apparently well, and so retired to nightly rest; in the 
morning he was found to have died in sleep. 
ROBERT WIGHT. 
Robert Wight, M. D., died at his residence, near Reading, 
England, May 26, 1872, at the age of seventy-six years. 
He was born in East Lothian, Scotland, educated at the Edinburgh 
High School, and professionally at Edinburgh University, 
where he took his medical degree in 1816. He went to 
India, the field of his botanical career and most useful administrative 
activity for forty years, in 1819. Fie was first 
assistant surgeon and afterward full surgeon of a native regiment 
in the East India Company's service, but was soon transferred 
to the charge of the Botanic Garden at Madras, and 
finally to that of the important cotton plantations at Coimbatoor. 
His earliest botanical contributions occupy a conspicuous 
place in Hooker's " Botanical Miscellany," commencing 
in 1830, and in the continuation of that work under other 
names and firms. In 1834, after a temporary sojourn in his 
native city, appeared the first volume of a model flora, the 
" Prodromus Florae Peninsulas Indise Orientalis," by Dr. 
Wight and Mr. (afterwards Professor) Arnott, of which their 
successors in the field remarked, that it is the most able and 
valuable contribution to Indian botany which has ever appeared, 
and one which has few rivals in the whole domain of 
botanical literature. Dr. Wight returned to India immediately 
after the publication of this initial volume of the work, 
which was never continued. In India, assisted by native artists 
whom he had trained, he brought out two quarto volumes 
of " Illustrations of Indian Botany," with one hundred and 
eighty-two colored plates ; his " Spicilegium Nielgberrense," 
of similar character ; and finally his " Icones Plantarum Indiae 
Orientalis," in six volumes, with 2101 uncolored lithographic 
plates, and elaborate analysis, of unequal merit, many of them 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., v. 395. (1873.) 
357 
ROBERT WIGHT. 
truly excellent, but all wonderful, under the circumstances of 
their production. When he returned to England, nearly 
twenty years ago, his productive season, as it proved, was 
nearly over. But he distributed his collections with a liberal 
hand, as indeed he had always done, and in spite of a failing 
health enjoyed in a serene and happy old age the quiet 
country residence to which he retired. 
FREDERIK WELWITSCH. 
Frederik Welwitsch, M. D., died in London, on the 
20th of October last, in the sixty-ninth year of his age. He 
was a native of Carinthia ; was educated at Vienna ; was commissioned 
by the Wiirtemberg Unio Itineraria to collect the 
plants of the Azores and Cape Verde Islands ; but on reaching 
Lisbon and finding good employment there, he made 
Portugal the field of his investigations, until, in 1850, he was 
sent by the Portuguese government to explore the natural 
history of its possessions on the west coast of Africa. His 
exploration of Angola and Benguela was rewarded by the 
discovery of more highly curious plants, probably, than any 
other that has been undertaken since Australia was opened to 
botanists ; among them, and strangest of all, the genus which 
commemorates the discoverer, Welwitschia mirabilis, which 
Dr. Hooker, who described and illustrated it, does " not hesitate 
to consider the most wonderful, in a botanical point of 
view, that has been brought to light during the present century." 
Perhaps the limitation in the latter clause of the 
sentence is needless. This inhabits a most arid waste. In 
another district, under almost opposite conditions, Welwitsch 
had the good fortune to find the only Cactaceous plant indigenous 
out of America, namely, Rhipsalis Cassytha, and in a 
lake a new and most remote habitat of our Brasenia peltata ! 
In his " Sertum Angolense," a splendid memoir published by 
the Linnaean Society, with twenty-five plates, some of his most 
interesting discoveries are described ; but the still unpublished 
portions of his collections must furnish most important contributions 
to the " Flora of Tropical Africa," now in progress 
under the orders of the British Colonial department and the 
editorship of Professor Oliver of Kew. It is to be hoped 
that they are to be more fully available for this flora than 
they have thus far been. 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., v. 396. (1873.) 
JOHN TORREY. 
John Torrey, M. D., LL. D., died at New York, on the 
10th of March, 1873, in the seventy-seventh year of his age. 
He has long been the chief of American botanists, and was 
at his death the oldest, with the exception of the venerable 
ex-President of the American Academy (Dr. Bigelow), who 
entered the botanical field several years earlier, but left it to 
gather the highest honors and more lucrative rewards of the 
medical profession, about the time when Dr. Torrey determined 
to devote his life to scientific pursuits. 
The latter was of an old New England stock, being, it is 
thought, a descendant of William Torrey, who emigrated 
from Combe St. Nicholas, near Chard, in Somersetshire, and 
settled at Weymouth, Massachusetts, about the year 1640. 2 
His grandfather, John Torrey, with his son William, removed 
from Boston to Montreal at the time of the enforce- 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, ix. 262. (1873.) 
2 In some notes furnished by a member of the family, the descent is 
endeavored to he traced through the eldest of the five sons who survived 
their parent, namely, Samuel, who came with him from England, became 
a minister of the Gospel, and had the unprecedented honor of preaching 
three election sermons (in 1674, 1683, and 1695), as well as of having 
three times declined the presidency of Harvard College (after Hoar, after 
Oakes, and after Rogers). Although educated at the college, he was not 
a graduate, because he left it in 1650, after three years' residence, just 
when the term for the A. B. degree was lengthened to four years. The 
tradition has it, that, " at the prayer-meetings of the students, he was 
generally invited to make the concluding prayer," — for which an obvious 
reason suggests itself, — for, " such was his devotion of spirit that, after 
praying for two hours, the regret was that he did not continue longer." 
Students of the present day are probably less exacting. 
The desire to claim a descent through so eminent a member of the 
family is natural. But our late venerable associate, Mr. Savage, in his 
Dictionary of early New England families, states that he could not ascertain 
that Samuel had any children. 
ment of the Boston Port Bill. But neither of them was disposed 
to be a refugee. For the son, then a lad of seventeen 
years, ran away from Canada to New York, joined his uncle, 
Joseph Torrey, a major of one of the two light infantry regiments 
of regulars (called Congress's Own) which were raised 
in that city ; was made an ensign, and was in the rearguard 
of his regiment on the retreat to White Plains ; served in it 
throughout the war with honor, and until at the close he reentered 
the city upon Evacuation Day, when he retired with 
the rank of captain. Moreover, the father soon followed the 
son, and became quartermaster of the regiment. Captain 
Torrey, in 1791, married Margaret Nichols, of New York. 
The subject of this biographical notice was the second of 
the issue of this marriage, and the oldest child who survived 
to manhood. He was born in New York, on the 15th of August, 
1796. He received such education only as the public 
schools of his native city then afforded, and was also sent for 
a year to a school in Boston. When he was fifteen or sixteen 
years old his father was appointed fiscal agent of the state 
prison at Greenwich, then a suburban village, to which the 
family removed. 
At this early age he chanced to attract the attention of 
Amos Eaton, who soon afterwards became a well-known 
pioneer of natural science, and with whom it may be said that 
popular instruction in natural history in this country began. 
He taught young Torrey the structure of flowers and the rudiments 
of botany, and thus awakened a taste and kindled a 
zeal which were extinguished only with his pupil's life. This 
fondness soon extended to mineralogy and chemistry, and 
probably determined the choice of a profession. In the year 
1815, Torrey began the study of medicine in the office of the 
eminent Dr. Wright Post, and in the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, in which the then famous Dr. Mitchill and Dr. 
Hosack were professors of scientific repute ; he took his medical 
degree in 1818 ; opened an office in his native city, and 
engaged in the practice of medicine with moderate success, 
turning the while his abundant leisure to scientific pursuits, 
especially to botany. In 1817, while yet a medical student, 
he reported to the Lyceum of Natural History — of which 
he was one of the founders — his "Catalogue of the Plants 
growing spontaneously within Thirty Miles of the City of 
New York," which was published two years later ; and he was 
already, or very soon after, in correspondence with Kurt 
Sprengel and Sir James Edward Smith abroad, as well as 
with Elliott, Nuttall, Schweinitz, and other American botanists. 
Two mineralogical articles were contributed by him to 
the very first volume of the " American Journal of Science 
and Arts " (1818-1819), and several others appeared a few 
years later, in this and in other journals. 
Elliott's " Sketch of the Botany of South Carolina and Georgia 
" was at this time in course of publication, and Dr. Torrey 
planned a counterpart systematic work upon the botany of 
the northern States. The result of this was his " Flora of 
the Northern and Middle Sections of the United States," i. e., 
north of Virginia, — which was issued in parts, and the first 
volume concluded in the summer of 1824. In this work Dr. 
Torrey first developed his remarkable aptitude for descriptive 
botany, and for the kind of investigation and discrimination, 
the tact and acumen, which it calls for. Only those few — 
now, alas, very few — surviving botanists who used this book 
through the following years can at all appreciate its value and 
influence. It was the fruit of those few but precious years 
which, seasoned with pecuniary privation, are in this country 
not rarely vouchsafed to an investigator, in which to prove 
his quality before he is haply overwhelmed with professional 
or professorial labors and duties. 
In 1824, the year in which the first volume (or nearly half) 
of his Flora was published, he married Miss Eliza Robinson 
Shaw, of New York, and was established at West Point, 
having been chosen professor of chemistry, mineralogy, and 
geology in the United States Military Academy. Three years 
later he exchanged this chair for that of chemistry and botany 
(practically that of chemistry only, for botany had already 
been allowed to fall out of the medical curriculum in 
this country) in the College of Physicians and Surgeons, New 
York, then in Barclay Street. The Flora of the Northern 
States was never carried further ; although a Compendium, a 
pocket volume for the field, containing brief characters of 
the species which were to have been described in the second 
volume, along with an abridgment of the contents of the first, 
was issued in 1826. Moreover, long before Dr. Torrey could 
find time to go on with the work, he foresaw that the natural 
system was not much longer to remain, here and in England, 
an esoteric doctrine, confined to profound botanists, but was 
destined to come into general use and to change the character 
of botanical instruction. He was himself the first to apply it 
in this country in any considerable publication. 
The opportunity for this, and for extending his investigations 
to the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains on their 
western boundary, was furnished by the collections placed in 
Dr. Torrey's hands by Dr. Edwin James, the botanist of 
Major Long's expedition in 1820. This expedition skirted 
the Rocky Mountains belonging to what is now called Colorado 
Territory, where Dr. James, first and alone, reached the 
charming alpine vegetation, scaling one of the very highest 
summits, which from that time and for many years afterward 
was appropriately named James's Peak ; although it is now 
called Pike's Peak, in honor of General Pike, who long before 
had probably seen, but had not reached it. 
As early as the year 1823, Dr. Torrey communicated to the 
Lyceum of Natural History descriptions of some new species 
of James's collection, and in 1826 an extended account of all 
the plants collected, arranged under their natural orders. 
This is the earliest treatise of the sort in this country, arranged 
upon the natural system ; and with it begins the history 
of the botany of the Rocky Mountains, if we except a 
few plants collected early in the century by Lewis and Clark, 
where they crossed them many degrees farther north, and 
which are recorded in Pursh's Flora. The next step in the 
direction he was aiming was made in the year 1831, when he 
superintended an American reprint of the first edition of 
I.iudley's " Introduction to the Natural System of Botany," 
and appended a catalogue of the North American genera 
arranged according to it. 
Dr. Torrey took an early and prominent part in the investigation 
of the United States species of the vast genus Carex, 
which has ever since been a favorite study in this country. 
His friend, Von Schweinitz, of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 
placed in his hands and desired him to edit, during the author's 
absence in Europe, his " Monograph of North American 
Carices." It was published in the " Annals of the New 
York Lyceum," in 1825, much extended, indeed almost wholly 
rewritten, and so much to Schweinitz's satisfaction that he 
insisted that this classical monograph " should be considered 
and quoted in all respects as the joint production of Dr. Torrey 
and himself." Ten or eleven years later, in the succeeding 
volume of the " Annals of the New York Lyceum," 
appeared Dr. Torrey's elaborate Monograph of the other 
North American Cyperacece, with an appended revision, of 
the Carices, which meanwhile had been immensely increased 
by the collections of Richardson, Drummond, etc., in British 
and arctic America. A full set of these was consigned to his 
hands for study (along with other important collections), by 
his friend Sir William Hooker, upon the occasion of a visit 
which he made to Europe in 1833. But Dr. Torrey generously 
turned over the Carices to the late Professor Dewey, 
whose rival Caricography is scattered through forty or fifty 
volumes of the " American Journal of Science and Arts " ; 
and so had only to sum up the results in this regard, and add 
a few southern species at the close of his own monograph of 
the order. 
About this time, namely, in the year 1836, upon the organization 
of a geological survey of the State of New York upon 
an extensive plan, Dr. Torrey was appointed botanist, and 
was required to prepare a Flora of the State. A laborious 
undertaking it proved to be, involving a heavy sacrifice of 
time, and postponing the realization of long-cherished plans. 
But in 1843, after much discouragement, the " Flora of the 
State of New York," the largest if by no means the most important 
of Dr. Torrey's works, was completed and published, 
m two large quarto volumes, with one hundred and sixty-one 
plates. No other State of the Union has produced a Flora to 
compare with this. The only thing to be regretted is that it 
interrupted, at a critical period, the prosecution of a far more 
important work. 
Early in his career Dr. Torrey had resolved to undertake a 
general Flora of North America, or at least of the United 
States, arranged upon the natural system, and had asked Mr. 
Nuttall to join him, who, however, did not consent. At that 
time, when little was known of the regions west of the valley 
of the Mississippi, the ground to be covered and the materials 
at hand were of comparatively moderate compass ; and in aid 
of the northern part of it, Sir William Hooker's Flora of 
British America — founded upon the rich collections of the 
arctic explorers, of the Hudson's Bay Company's intelligent 
officers, and of such hardy and enterprising pioneers as Drummond 
and Douglas — was already in progress. At the actual 
inception of the enterprise, the botany of eastern Texas was 
opened by Drummond's collections, as well as that of the coast 
of California by those of Douglas, and afterwards those of 
Nuttall. As they clearly belonged to our own phyto-geographical 
province, Texas and California were accordingly 
annexed botanically before they became so politically. 
While the field of botanical operations was thus enlarging, 
the time which could be devoted to it was restricted. In addition 
to his chair in the Medical College, Dr. Torrey had 
felt obliged to accept a similar one at Princeton College, 
and to all was now added, as we have seen, the onerous post 
of state botanist. It was in the year 1836 or 1837 that he 
invited the writer of this notice — then pursuing botanical 
studies under his auspices and direction —to become his associate 
in the Flora of North America. In July and in October, 
1838, the first two parts, making half of the first volume, 
were published. The great need of a full study of the sources 
and originals of the earlier published species was now apparent 
; so, during the following year, his associate occupied 
himself with this work in the principal herbaria of Europe. 
The remaining half of the first volume appeared in June, 
1840. The first part of the second volume followed in 1841; 
the second, in the spring of 1842 ; and in February, 1843, 
came the third and the last ; for Dr. Torrey's associate was 
now also immersed in professorial duties and in the consequent 
preparation of the works and collections which were 
necessary to their prosecution. 
From that time to the present the scientific exploration of 
the vast interior of the continent has been actively carried on, 
and in consequence new plants have poured in year by year 
in such numbers as to overtask the powers of the few working 
botanists of the country, nearly all of them weighted with 
professional engagements. The most they could do has been 
to put collections into order in special reports, revise here and 
there a family or a genus monographically, and incorporate 
new materials into older parts of the fabric, or rough-hew 
them for portions of the edifice yet to be constructed. In all 
this Dr. Torrey took a prominent part down almost to the last 
days of his life. Passing by various detached and scattered 
articles upon curious new genera and the like, but not forgetting 
three admirable papers published in the " Smithsonian 
Contributions to Knowledge" (Plantae Fremontianae, and 
those on Batis and Darlingtonia), there is a long series of 
important, and some of them very extensive, contributions to 
the reports of government explorations of the western country, 
— from that of Long's expedition, already referred to, in 
which he first developed his powers, through those of Nicollet, 
Fremont, and Emory, Sitgreaves, Stansbury, and Marcy, and 
those contained in the ampler volumes of the Surveys for Pacific 
Railroad routes, down to that of the Mexican Boundary, 
the botany of which forms a bulky quarto volume, of much 
interest. Even at the last, when he rallied transiently from 
the fatal attack, he took in hand the manuscript of an elaborate 
report on the plants collected along our Pacific coast in 
Admiral Wilkes's celebrated expedition, which he had prepared 
fully a dozen years ago, and which (except as to the 
plates) remains still unpublished through no fault of his. 
There would have been more to add, perhaps of equal importance, 
if Dr. Torrey had been as ready to complete and publish, 
as he was to investigate, annotate, and sketch. Through 
undue diffidence and a constant desire for a greater perfec- 
tion than was at the time attainable, many interesting observations 
have from time to time been anticipated by other 
botanists. 
All this botanical work, it may be observed, has reference 
to the Flora of North America, in which, it was hoped, the 
diverse and separate materials and component parts, which he 
and others had wrought upon, might some day be brought 
together in a completed system of American botany. 
It remains to be seen whether his surviving associate of 
nearly forty years will be able to complete the edifice. To do 
this will be to supply the most pressing want of the science, 
and to raise the fittest monument to Dr. Torrey's memory. 
In the estimate of Dr. Torrey's botanical work, it must not 
be forgotten that it was nearly all done in the intervals of a 
busy professional life ; that he was for more than thirty years 
an active and distinguished teacher, mainly of chemistry, and 
in more than one institution at the same time ; that he devoted 
much time and remarkable skill and judgment to the practical 
applications of chemistry, in which his counsels were constantly 
sought and too generously given; that when, in 1857, he exchanged 
a portion, and a few years later the whole, of his professional 
duties for the office of United States Assayer, these 
requisitions upon his time became more numerous and urgent. 1 
In addition to the ordinary duties of his office, which he fulfilled 
to the end with punctilious faithfulness (signing the last of 
his daily reports upon the very day of his death, and quietly 
telling his son and assistant that it would not be necessary to 
bring him any more), he was frequently requested by the head 
of the Treasury Department to undertake the solution of difficult 
problems, especially those relating to counterfeiting, or to 
take charge of some delicate or confidential commission, the utmost 
reliance being placed upon his skill, wisdom, and probity. 
1 It ought to be added, that, when the government Assay Office at 
New York was established, the Secretary of the Treasury selected Dr. 
Torrey to be its superintendent, — which would have given to the establishment 
the advantage of a scientific head. But Dr. Torrey resolutely 
declined the less laborious and better paid post, and took in preference 
one the emoluments of which were much below his worth and the valuable 
extraneous services he rendered to the government, — simply because 
he was unwilling to accept the care and responsibility of treasure. 
In two instances these commissions were made personally 
gratifying, not by pecuniary payment, which, beyond his simple 
expenses, he did not receive, but by the opportunity they 
afforded to recruit failing health and to gather floral treasures. 
Eight years ago he was sent by the Treasury Department to 
California, by way of the Isthmus ; and last summer he went 
again across the continent, and in both cases enjoyed the rare 
pleasure of viewing in their native soil, and plucking with his 
own hands, many a flower which he had himself named and 
described from dried specimens in the herbarium, and in which 
he felt a kind of paternal interest. Perhaps this interest culminated 
last summer, when he stood on the flank of the lofty 
and beautiful snow-clad peak to which a grateful former pupil 
and ardent explorer, ten years before, gave his name, and 
gathered charming alpine plants which he had himself named 
forty years before, when the botany of the Colorado Rocky 
Mountains was first opened. That age and fast-failing strength 
had not dimmed his enjoyment, may be inferred from his 
remark when, on his return from Florida the previous spring, 
with a grievous cough allayed, he was rallied for having gone 
to seek Ponce de Leon's Fountain of Youth. " No," said he, 
" give me the fountain of old age. The longer I live, the 
more I enjoy life." He evidently did so. If never robust, he 
was rarely ill, and his last sickness brought little suffering, 
and no diminution of his characteristic cheerfulness. To him, 
indeed, never came the " evil days " of which he could say, 
" I have no pleasure in them." 
Evincing in age much of the ardor and all of the ingenuousness 
of youth, he enjoyed the society of young men and 
students, and was helpful to them long after he ceased to 
teach, — if, indeed, he ever did cease. For, as Emeritus 
Professor in Columbia College (with which his old Medical 
ochool was united), he not only opened his herbarium, but 
gave some lectures almost every year, and as a trustee of the 
college for many years he rendered faithful and important 
service. Flis large and truly invaluable herbarium, along 
with a choice botanical library, he several years ago made over 
to Columbia College, which charges itself with its safe preservation 
and maintenance. 
Dr. Torrey leaves three daughters, a son, who has been 
appointed United States assayer in his father's place, and a 
grandson. 
This sketch of Dr. Torrey's public life and works, which it 
is our main duty to exhibit, would fall short of its object if it 
did not convey, however briefly and incidentally, some just 
idea of what manner of man he was. That he was earnest, 
indefatigable, and able, it is needless to say. His gifts as a 
teacher were largely proved and are widely known through a 
long generation of pupils. As an investigator he was characterized 
by a scrupulous accuracy, a remarkable fertility of 
mind, especially as shown in devising ways and means of 
research, and perhaps by some excess of caution. 
Other biographers will doubtless dwell upon the more personal 
aspects and characteristics of our distinguished and 
lamented associate. To them, indeed, may fittingly be left 
the full delineation and illustration of the traits of a singularly 
transparent, genial, delicate, and conscientious, unselfish 
character, which beautified and fructified a most industrious 
and useful life, and won the affection of all who knew him. 
For one thing, they cannot fail to notice his thorough love 
of truth for its own sake, and his entire confidence that the 
legitimate results of scientific inquiry would never be inimical 
to the Christian religion, which he held with an untroubled 
faith, and illustrated, most naturally and unpretendingly, 
in all his life and conversation. In this, as well as in 
the simplicity of his character, he much resembled Faraday. 
Dr. Torrey was an honorary or corresponding member of a 
goodly number of the scientific societies of Europe, and was 
naturally connected with all prominent institutions of the 
kind in this country. He was chosen into the American 
Academy in the year 1811. He was one of the corporate 
members of the National Academy at Washington. He presided 
in his turn over the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science ; and he was twice, for considerable 
periods, president of the New York Lyceum of Natural 
History, which was in those days one of the foremost of our 
scientific societies. It has been said of him that the sole 
distinction on which he prided himself was his membership 
in the order of the Cincinnati, the only honor in this country 
which comes by inheritance. 
As to the customary testimonial which the botanist receives 
from his fellows, it is fortunate that the first attempts were 
nugatory. Almost in his youth a genus was dedicated to him 
by his correspondent, Sprengel : this proved to be a Clerodendron, 
misunderstood. A second, proposed by Rafinesque, was 
founded on an artificial dismemberment of Cyperus. The 
ground was clear, therefore, when, thirty or forty years ago, a 
new and remarkable evergreen tree was discovered in our own 
southern States, which it was at once determined should bear 
Dr. Torrey's name. More recently a congener was found in 
the noble forests of California. Another species had already 
been recognized in Japan, and lately a fourth in the mountains 
of northern China. All four of them have been introduced, 
and are greatly prized as ornamental trees in Europe. So 
that, all round the world, Torreya taxifolia, Torreya Californica, 
Torreya nucifera, and Torreya grandis — as well as 
his own important contributions to botany, of which they are 
a memorial — should keep our associate's memory as green as 
their own perpetual verdure. 
WILLIAM STARLING SULLIVANT. 
William Starling Sttllivant, LL. D., died at his residence 
in Columbus, Ohio, on the 30th of April, ultimo. In 
him we lose the most accomplished bryologist which this 
country has produced ; and it can hardly be said that he 
leaves behind him anywhere a superior. 
He was born, January 15, 1803, at the little village of 
Franklinton, then a frontier settlement in the midst of primitive 
forest, near the site of the present city of Columbus. His 
father, a Virginian, and a man of marked character, was appointed 
by government to survey the lands of that district of 
the Northwestern Territory which became the central part 
of the now populous State of Ohio ; and he early purchased 
a large tract of land, bordering on the Scioto River, near by, 
if not including, the locality which was afterwards fixed upon 
for the state capital. 
William, his eldest son, in his boyhood, if he endured some 
of the privations, yet enjoyed the advantages of this frontier 
life, in the way of physical training and early self-reliance. 
But he was sent to school in Kentucky ; he received the rudiments 
of his classical education at the so-called Ohio University 
at Athens, upon the opening of that seminary ; and was 
afterward transferred to Yale College, where he was graduated 
in the year 1823. His plans for studying a profession were 
frustrated by the death of his father in that year. This required 
him to occupy himself with the care of the family 
property, then mainly in lands, mills, etc., and demanding 
much and varied attention. He became surveyor and practical 
engineer, and indeed took an active part in business 
down to a recent period. Leisure is hardly to be had in a 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, ix. 271. 
(1873.) 
newly settled country, and least of all by those who have possessions. 
Mr. Sullivant must have reached the age of nearly 
thirty years, and, having married early, 1 was established in 
his suburban residence in a rich floral district, before his taste 
for natural history was at all developed. Flis brother Joseph, 
next in age, was already somewhat proficient in botany as well 
as in conchology and ornithology ; and when in some way his 
own interest in the subject was at length excited, he took it 
up with characteristic determination to know well whatever 
he undertook to know at all. He collected and carefully 
studied the plants of the central part of Ohio, made neat 
sketches of the minuter parts of many of them, especially of 
the Grasses and Sedges, entered into communication with the 
leading botanists of the country, and in 1840 he published 
" A Catalogue of Plants, Native or Naturalized, in the vicinity 
of Columbus, Ohio," (pp. 63,) to which he added a few pages 
of valuable notes. His only other direct publication in Phaenogamous 
botany is a short article upon three new plants which 
he had discovered in that district, contributed to the " American 
Journal of Science and Arts," in the year 1842. The 
observations which he continued to make were communicated 
to his correspondents and friends, the authors of the Flora of 
North America, then in progress. As soon as the flowering 
plants of his district had ceased to afford him novelty, he 
turned to the Mosses, in which he found abundant -scientific 
occupation, of a kind well suited to his bent for patient and 
close observation, scrupulous accuracy, and nice discrimination. 
His first publication in his chosen department, the 
" Musci Alleghanienses," was accompanied by the specimens 
themselves of Mosses and PPepaticce collected in a botanical 
expedition through the Alleghany Mountains from Maryland 
to Georgia, in the summer of 1843, the writer of this notice 
being his companion. The specimens were not only critically 
determined, but exquisitely prepared and mounted, and 
with letter-press of great perfection ; the whole forming two 
quarto volumes, which well deserve the encomium bestowed 
His first wife, Jane Marshall of Kentucky, was a niece of Chief 
Justice Marshall. She died a few years after marriage. 
by Pritzel in his Thesaurus. 1 It was not put on sale, but fifty 
copies were distributed with a free hand among bryologists 
and others who would appreciate it. 2 
In 1846, Mr. Sullivant communicated to the American 
Academy the first part, and in 1849, the second part of his 
" Contributions to the Bryology and Hepaticology of North 
America," which appeared, one in the third, the other in the 
fourth volume (new series) of the Academy's Memoirs, each 
with five plates, from the author's own admirable drawings. 
These plates were engraved at his own expense, and were 
generously given to the Academy. 
When the second edition of Gray's " Manual of the Botany 
of the Northern United States " was in preparation, Mr. Sullivant 
was asked to contribute to it a compendious account of 
the Musci and PPepaticce of the region ; which he did, in the 
space of about one hundred pages, generously adding, at his 
sole charge, eight copperplates crowded with illustrations of 
the details of the genera, — thus enhancing vastly the value 
of his friend's work, and laying a foundation for the general 
study of bryology in the United States, which then and thus 
began. 
So excellent are these illustrations, both in plan and execution, 
that Schimper, then the leading bryologist of the Old 
World, and a most competent judge, since he has published 
hundreds of figures in his " Bryologia Europaea," not only 
adopted the same plan in his " Synopsis of the European 
Mosses," but also the very figures themselves (a few of which 
were, however, originally his own), whenever they would serve 
his purpose, as was the case with most of them. A separate 
edition was published of this portion of the Manual, under the 
title of " The Musci and Hepaticae of the United States east 
1 " Huic splendidse impressse 292 specierum enumeration! accedit elegantissima 
speciminum omnium exsiccatorum collectio." 
2 A tribute is justly due to the memory of the second Mrs. (Eliza G. 
Wheeler) Sullivant, a lady of rare accomplishments, and, not least, a 
zealous and acute bryologist, her husband's efficient associate in all his 
scientific work until her death, of cholera, in 1850 or 1851. Her botanical 
services are commemorated in Hypnum Sullivantim of Schimper, a new 
Moss of Ohio. 
of the Mississippi River" (New York, 1856, imperial 8vo), 
upon thick paper, and with proof-impressions directly from 
the copperplates. This exquisite volume was placed on sale 
at far less than its cost, and copies are now of great rarity 
and value. It was with regret that the author of the Manual 
omitted this Cryptogamic portion from the ensuing editions, 
and only with the understanding that a separate " Species 
Muscorum," or Manual for the Mosses of the whole United 
States, should replace it. This most needful work Mr. Sullivant 
was just about to prepare for the press. 
About the same time that Mr. Sullivant thus gave to 
American students a text-book for our Mosses, he provided 
an unequaled series of named specimens for illustrating them. 
The ample stores which he had collected or acquired, supplemented 
by those collected by M. Lesquereux (who was associated 
with him from the year 1848) in a journey through the 
mountainous parts of the southern States under his auspices, 
after critical determination were divided into fifty sets, each 
of about three hundred and sixty species or varieties, with 
printed tickets, title, index, etc., and all except a few copies 
for gratuitous distribution were generously made over, to be 
sold at less than cost, for his esteemed associate's benefit, and 
still more for that of the botanists and institutions who could 
thus acquire them. The title of this classical work and collection 
is " Musci Boreali Americani quorum specimina exsiccati 
ediderunt W. S. Sullivant et L. Lesquereux ; 1856." 
Naturally enough the edition was immediately taken up. 
In 1865 it was followed by a new one, or rather a new work, 
of between five and six hundred numbers, many of them Californian 
species, the first - fruits of Dr. Bolander's researches 
in that country. The sets of this unequaled collection were 
disposed of with the same unequaled liberality, and with the 
sole view of advancing the knowledge of his favorite science. 
This second edition being exhausted, he recently and in the 
same spirit aided his friend Mr. Austin, both in the study 
and in the publication of his extensive "Musci Appalachiani." 
To complete here the account of Mr. Sullivant's bryological 
labors illustrated by "exsiccati," we may mention his "Musci 
Cubenses," named, and the new species described in 1861, 
from Charles Wright's earlier collections in Cuba, and distributed 
in sets by the collector. His researches upon later 
and more extensive collections by Mr. Wright remain in the 
form of notes and pencil sketches, in which many new species 
are indicated. The same may be said of an earlier still unpublished 
collection, made by Fendler in Venezuela. Another 
collection, of great extent and interest, which was long ago 
elaborately prepared for publication, and illustrated by very 
many exquisite drawings, rests in his portfolios, through delays 
over which Mr. Sullivant had no control ; namely, the Bryology 
of Rodgers's United States North Pacific Exploring 
Expedition, of which Charles Wright was botanist. Brief 
characters of the principal new species were, however, duly 
published in this as in other departments of the botany of 
that expedition. It is much to be regretted that the drawings 
which illustrate them have not yet been engraved and given 
to the scientific world. 
This has fortunately been done in the case of the South 
Pacific Exploring Expedition, under Commodore Wilkes. 
For, although the volume containing the Mosses has not even 
yet been issued by government, Mr. Sullivant's portion of it 
was published in a separate edition in the year 1859. It 
forms a sumptuous imperial folio, the letter-press having been 
made up into large pages, and printed on paper which matches 
the plates, twenty-six in number. 
One volume of the Pacific Railroad Reports, i. e. the fourth, 
contains a paper by Mr. Sullivant, being his account of the 
Mosses collected in Whipple's Exploration. It consists of 
only a dozen pages of letter-press, but is illustrated by ten 
admirable plates of new species. 
The " Icones Muscorum," however, is Mr. Sullivant's 
crowning work. It consists, as the title indicates, of " Figures 
and Descriptions of most of those Mosses peculiar to 
eastern North America which have not been heretofore figured," 
and forms an imperial octavo volume, with one hundred 
and twenty-nine copperplates, published in 1864. The 
letter-press and the plates (upon which last alone several 
thousand dollars and immense pains were expended) are 
simply exquisite and wholly unrivaled ; and the scientific 
character is acknowledged to be worthy of the setting. 
Within the last few years most of the time which Mr. Sullivant 
could devote to science has been given to the preparation 
of a second or supplementary volume of the Icones. The 
plates, it is understood, are completed, the descriptions in a 
good degree written out, and the vernal months in which his 
mortal life closed were to have been devoted to the printing. 
The Manual of North American Mosses was speedily to 
follow. 
He was remarkably young for his years, so that the hopes 
and expectations in which we were indulging seemed reasonable. 
But in January, not far from his seventieth birthday, 
he was prostrated by pneumonia, from the consequences of 
which, after some seeming convalescence, he died upon the 
last day of April. He leaves a wife, Mrs. Caroline E. (Sutton) 
Sullivant, children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, 
to inherit a stainless and honored name, and to cherish 
a noble memory. 
In personal appearance and carriage, no less than in all the 
traits of an unselfish and well-balanced character, Mr. Sullivant 
was a fine specimen of a man. He had excellent business 
talents, and was an exemplary citizen ; he had a refined 
and sure taste, and was an accomplished draughtsman. But 
after having illustrated his earlier productions with his own 
pencil, he found that valuable time was to be gained by employing 
a trained artist. He discovered in Mr. A. Schrader 
a hopeful draughtsman, and he educated him to the work, 
with what excellent results the plates of the Icones and of 
his other works abundantly show. As an investigator he 
worked deliberately, slowly indeed and not continuously, but 
perseveringly. Having chosen his particular department, he 
gave himself undeviatingly to its advancement. His works 
have laid such a broad and complete foundation for the study 
of bryology in this country, and are of such recognized importance 
everywhere, that they must always be of classical 
authority ; in fact, they are likely to remain for a long time 
unrivaled. Wherever Mosses are studied, his name will be 
honorably remembered ; in this country it should long be 
remembered with peculiar gratitude. 
In accordance with his wishes, his bryological books and 
his exceedingly rich and important collections and preparations 
of Mosses are to be consigned to the Gray Herbarium 
of Harvard University, with a view to their preservation and 
long-continued usefulness. The remainder of his botanical 
library, his choice microscopes, and other collections are bequeathed 
to the State Scientific and Agricultural College, 
just established at Columbus, and to the Starling Medical 
College, founded by his uncle, of which he was himself the 
senior trustee. 
Mr. Sullivant was chosen into the American Academy in 
the year 1845. He received the honorary degree of Doctor 
of Laws from Gambier College, in his native State. His oldest 
botanical associates long ago enjoyed the pleasure of bestowing 
the name of Sullivantia Ohionis upon a very rare 
and interesting but modest and neat Saxifragaceous plant, 
which he himself discovered in his native State, on. the secluded 
banks of a tributary of the river which flows by the 
place where he was born, and where his remains now repose. 
JEFFRIES WYMAN. 
When we think of the associate and friend whose death 
this Society now deplores, and remember how modest and retirinsr 
he was, how averse to laudation and reticent of words, 
we feel it becoming to speak of him now that he is gone, 
with much of the reserve which would be imposed upon us if 
he were living. Yet his own perfect truthfulness and nice 
sense of justice, and the benefit to be derived from the contemplation 
of such a character by way of example, may be 
our warrant for reasonable freedom in the expression of our 
judgments and our sentiments, taking care to avoid all exaggeration. 

Appropriate and sincere eulogies and expressions of loss, 
both official and personal, have, however, already been pronounced 
or published ; and among them one from the governors 
of that institution to which, together with our own 
Society, most of Professor Wyman's official life and services 
were devoted, — which appears to me to delineate in the fewest 
words the truest outlines of his character. In it the President 
and Fellows of Harvard University " recall with affectionate 
respect and admiration the sagacity, patience, and 
rectitude which characterized all his scientific work, his clearness, 
accuracy, and conciseness as a writer and teacher, and 
the industry and zeal with which he labored upon the two admirable 
collections which remain as monuments of his rare 
knowledge, method, and skill. They commend to the young 
men of the University this signal example of a character 
modest, tranquil, dignified, and independent, and of a life 
simple, contented, and honored." 
What more can be or need be said ? It is left for me, in 
1 An address delivered at a memorial meeting of the Boston Society of 
Natural History, October 7, 1874. 
compliance with your invitation, Mr. President, to say something 
of what he was to us, and has done for us, and to put 
upon record, for the use of those who come after us, some 
account of his uneventful life, some notice, however imperfect, 
of his work and his writings. I could not do this without the 
help of friends who knew him well in early life, and of some 
of you who are much more conversant than I am with most 
of his researches. Such aid, promptly rendered, has been 
thankfully accepted and freely used. 
Our associate's father, Dr. Rufus Wyman, — born in 
Woburn, graduated at Harvard College in 1799, and in the 
latter part of his life physician to the McLean Asylum for 
the Insane, — was a man of marked ability and ingenuity. 
Called to the charge of this earliest institution of the kind 
in New England at its beginning, he organized the plan of 
treatment and devised excellent mechanical arrangements, 
which have since been developed, and introduced into other 
establishments of the kind. His mother was Ann Morill, 
daughter of James Morill, a Boston merchant. This name is 
continued, and is familiar to us, in that of our associate's 
elder brother. 
Jeffries Wyman, the third son, derived his baptismal name 
from the distinguished Dr. John Jeffries of Boston, under 
whom his father studied medicine. Fie was born on the 11th 
of August, 1814, at Chelmsford, a township of a few hundred 
inhabitants in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, not far 
from the present city of Lowell. As his father took up his 
residence at the McLean Asylum in 1818, when Jeffries was 
only four years old, he received the rudiments of his education 
at Charlestown, in a private school, but afterwards went 
to the Academy at Chelmsford, and in 1826 to Philips Exeter 
Academy, where, under the instruction of Dr. Abbot, he was 
prepared for college. He entered Harvard College in 1829, 
the year in which Josiah Quincy took the presidency, and was 
graduated in 1833, in a class of fifty-six, six of whom became 
professors in the University. He was not remarkable for 
general scholarship, but was fond of chemistry, and his preference 
for anatomical studies was already developed. Some 
of his classmates remember the interest which was excited 
among them by a skeleton which he made of a mammoth bullfrog 
from Fresh Pond, probably one which is still preserved 
in his museum of comparative anatomy. His skill and taste 
in drawing, which he turned to such excellent account in his 
investigations and in the lecture room, as well as his habit of 
close observation of natural objects met with in his strolls, 
were manifested even in boyhood. 
An attack of pneumonia during his senior year in college 
caused much anxiety, and perhaps laid the foundation of the 
pulmonary affection which burdened and finally shortened his 
life. To recover from the effects of the attack, and to guard 
against its return, he made, in the winter of 1833-34, the 
first of those pilgrimages to the coast of the southern States, 
which in later years were so often repeated. Returning with 
strength renewed in the course of the following spring, he 
began the study of medicine under Dr. John C. Dalton, who 
had succeeded to his father's practice at Chelmsford, but who 
soon removed to the adjacent and thriving town of Lowell. 
Here, and with his father at the McLean Asylum and at the 
Medical College in Boston, he passed two years of profitable 
study. At the commencement of the third year he was 
elected house-student in the medical department, at the Massachusetts 
General Flospital, — then under the charge of 
Drs. James Jackson, John Ware, and Walter Channing, — 
a responsible position, not only most advantageous for the 
study of disease, but well adapted to sharpen a young man's 
power of observation. 
In 1837, after receiving the degree of Doctor of Medicine, 
he cast about among the larger country towns for a field in 
which to practise his profession. Fortunately for science he 
found no opening to his mind ; so he took an office in Boston, 
on Washington Street, and accepted the honorable but far 
from lucrative post of demonstrator of anatomy under Dr. 
John C. Warren, the Hersey professor. His means were 
very slender, and his life abstemious to the verge of privation ; 
for he was unwilling to burden his father, who indeed had 
done all he could in providing for the education of two sons. 
It may be interesting to know, that, to eke out his subsistence, 
he became at this time a member of the Boston Fire Department, 
under an appointment of Samuel A. Eliot, Mayor, 
dated September 1, 1838. He was assigned to Engine No. 
18. The rule was that the first-comer to the engine-house 
should bear the lantern, and be absolved from other work. 
Wyman lived near by, and his promptitude generally saved 
him from all severer labor than that of enlightening his 
company. 
The turning-point in his life, i. e., an opportunity which he 
could seize of devoting it to science, came when Mr. John A. 
Lowell offered him the curatorship of the Lowell Institute, 
just brought into operation, and a course of lectures in it. 
He delivered his course of twelve lectures upon comparative 
anatomy and physiology in the winter of 1840-41 ; and with 
the money earned by this first essay in instructing others, he 
went to Europe to seek further instruction for himself. He 
reached Paris in May, 1841, and gave his time at once to 
human anatomy at the School of Medicine, and comparative 
anatomy and natural history at the Garden of Plants, 
attending the lectures of Flourens, Majendie, and Longet on 
physiology, and of De Blainville, Isidore St. Hilaire, Valenciennes, 
Dumeril, and Milne-Edwards on zoology and comparative 
anatomy. In the summer, when the lectures were, 
over, he made a pedestrian journey along the banks of the 
Loire, and another along the Rhine, returning through Belgium, 
and by steamer to London. There, while engaged in 
the study of the Hunterian collections at the Royal College of 
Surgeons, he received information of the alarming illness of 
his father ; he immediately turned his face homeward, but on 
reaching Halifax he learned that his father was no more. 
He resumed his residence in Boston, and devoted himself 
mainly to scientific work, under circumstances of no small 
discouragement. But in 1843 the means of a modest professional 
livelihood came to him in the offer of the chair of 
anatomy and physiology in the medical department of Hampden-Sidney 
College, established at Richmond, Virginia. One 
advantage of this position was that it did not interrupt his 
residence in Boston except for the winter and spring ; and 
during; these months the milder climate of Richmond was even 
then desirable. He discharged the duties of the chair most 
acceptably for five sessions, until in 1847 he was appointed 
to succeed Dr. Warren as Hersey professor of anatomy in 
Harvard College, the Parkman professorship in the Medical 
School in Boston being filled by the present incumbent, Dr. 
Holmes. Thus commenced Professor Wyman's most useful 
and honorable connection as a teacher with the University, of 
which the President and Fellows speak in the terms I have 
already recited. He began his work in Holden Chapel, the 
upper floor being the lecture room, the lower containing the 
dissecting; room and the anatomical museum of the college, 
with which he combined his own collections and preparations, 
which from that time forward increased rapidly in number 
and value under his industrious and skillful hands. At length 
Boylston Hall was built for the anatomical and the chemical 
departments, and the museum, lecture and working rooms 
were established commodiously in their present quarters ; and 
Professor Wyman's department assumed the rank and importance 
which it deserved. Both human and comparative 
anatomy were taught to special pupils, some of whom have 
proved themselves worthy of their honored master, while the 
annual courses of lectures and lessons on anatomy, physiology, 
and for a time the principles of zoology, imparted 
highly valued instruction to undergraduates and others. 
In the formation and perfecting of his museum — the first 
of the kind in the country, arranged upon a plan both physiological 
and morphological — no pains and labors were spared, 
and long and arduous journeys and voyages were made to contribute 
to its riches. In the summer of 1849, — having re- 
plenished his frugal means with the proceeds of a second 
course of lectures before the Lowell Institute (namely, upon 
comparative physiology, a good condensed shorthand report of 
which was published at the time), — he accompanied Captain 
Atwood of Provincetown, in a small sloop, upon a fishing voyage 
high up the coast of Labrador. In the winter of 1852, 
going to Florida for his health, he began his fruitful series of 
explorations and collections in that interesting district. In 
1854, accompanied by his wife, he traveled, extensively in 
Europe, and visited all the museums within his reach. In the 
spring of 1856, with his pupils Green and Bancroft as companions 
and assistants, he sailed to Surinam, penetrated far 
into the interior in canoes, made important researches upon 
the ground, and enriched his museum with some of its most 
interesting collections. These came near being too dearly 
bought, as he and his companions took the fever of the country, 
from which he suffered severely, and recovered slowly. 
Again, in 1858-9, accepting the thoughtful and generous invitation 
of Captain J. M. Forbes, he made a voyage to the La 
Plata, and ascended the Uruguay and the Parana in a small 
iron steamer which Captain Forbes brought upon the deck of 
his vessel ; then, with his friend George Augustus Peabody 
as a companion, he crossed the pampas to Mendosa, and the 
Cordilleras to Santiago and Valparaiso, whence he came home 
by way of the Peruvian coast and the Isthmus. 
By such expeditions many of the choice materials of his 
museum and of his researches were gathered, at his own expense, 
to be carefully prepared and elaborated by his own 
unaided hands. A vast neighboring museum is a splendid 
example of what munificence, called forth by personal enthusiasm, 
may accomplish. In Dr. Wyman's we have an example 
of what one man may do, unaided, with feeble health and 
feebler means, by persistent and well directed industry, without 
eclat, and almost without observation. While we duly 
honor those who of their abundance cast their gifts into the 
treasury of science, let us not — now that he cannot be pained 
by our praise — forget to honor one who in silence and penury 
cast in more than they all. 
Of penury in a literal sense we may not speak ; for although 
Professor Wyman's salary, derived from the Hersey endowment, 
was slender indeed, he adapted his wants to his means, 
foregoing neither his independence nor his scientific work ; 
and I suppose no one ever heard him complain. In 1856 
came unexpected and honorable aid from two old friends of 
his father, who appreciated the son, and wished him to go on 
with his scientific work without distraction. One of them, 
the late Dr. William J. Walker, sent him ten thousand dollars 
outright ; the other, the late Thomas Lee, who had helped 
in his early education, supplemented the endowment of the 
Hersey professorship with an equal sum, stipulating that the 
income thereof should be paid to Professor Wyman during 
life, whether he held the chair or not. Seldom, if ever, has 
a moderate sum produced a greater benefit. 
Throughout the later years of Professor Wyman's life a 
new museum has claimed his interest and care, and is indebted 
to him for much of its value and promise. In 1866, when 
failing strength demanded a respite from oral teaching, and 
required him to pass most of the season for it in a milder 
climate, he was named by the late George Peabody one of 
the seven trustees of the museum and professorship of American 
archaeology and ethnology, which this philanthropist proceeded 
to found in Harvard University ; and his associates 
called upon him to take charge of the establishment. For 
this he was peculiarly fitted by all his previous studies, and 
by his predilection for ethnological inquiries. These had already 
engaged his attention, and to this class of subjects he 
was thereafter mainly devoted, — with what sagacity, consummate 
skill, untiring diligence and success, his seventh annual 
report, — the last published just before he died, — his elaborate 
memoir on shell-heaps, now printing, and especially the 
Archaeological Museum in Boylston Hall, abundantly testify. 
If this museum be a worthy memorial of the founder's liberality 
and foresight, it is no less a monument to Wyman's rare 
ability and devotion. Whenever the enduring building which 
is to receive it shall be erected, surely the name of its first 
curator and organizer should be inscribed, along with that of 
the founder, over its portal. 
Of Professor Wyman's domestic life, let it here suffice to 
record, that in December, 1850, he married Adeline Wheelwright, 
who died in June, 1855, leaving two daughters ; that 
in August, 1861, he married Anna Williams Whitney, who 
died in February, 1864, shortly after the birth of an only and 
a surviving son. 
Of his later days, of the slow yet all too rapid progress of 
fatal pulmonary disease, it is needless to protract the story. 
Winter after winter, as he exchanged our bleak climate for 
that of Florida, we could only hope that he might return. 
Spring after spring he came back to us invigorated, thanks to 
the bland air and to open life in boat and tent, which acted 
like a charm ; — thanks, too, to the watchful care of his attached 
friend, Mr. Peabody, his constant companion in Florida 
life. One winter was passed in Europe, partly in reference 
to the Archaeological Museum, partly in hope of better health ; 
but no benefit was received. The past winter in Florida produced 
the usual amelioration, and the amount of work which 
Dr. Wyman undertook and accomplished last summer might 
have tasked a robust man. There were important accessions 
to the archaeological collections, upon which much labor, very 
trying to ordinary patience, had to be expended. And in the 
last interview I had with him, he told me that he had gone 
through his own museum of comparative anatomy, which 
had somewhat suffered in consequence of the alterations in 
Boylston Hall, and had put the whole into perfect order. It 
was late in August when he left Cambridge for his usual visit 
to the White Mountain region, by which he avoided the autumnal 
catarrh ; and there, at Bethlehem, New Hampshire, 
on the 4th of September, a severe hemorrhage from the lungs 
suddenly closed his valuable life. 
Let us turn to his relations with this society. He entered 
it in October, 1837, just thirty-seven years ago, and shortly 
after he had taken his degree of Doctor in Medicine. He 
was recording secretary from 1839 to 1841 ; curator of ichthyology 
and herpetology from 1841 to 1847 ; of herpetology 
from 1847 to 1845 ; of comparative anatomy from 1855 
to 1874. While in these later years his duties may have 
been almost nominal, it should be remembered that in the 
earlier days a curator not only took charge of his portion of 
the museum, but in a great degree created it. Then for fourteen 
years, from 1856 to 1870, he was the president of this 
society, as assiduous in all its duties as he was wise in council ; 
and he resigned the chair which he so long adorned and digni- 
fled, only when the increasing delicacy of his health, to which 
night exposure was prejudicial, made it unsafe for him any 
longer to undertake its duties. The record shows that he has 
made here one hundred and five scientific communications, 
several of them very important papers, every one of some positive 
value; for you all know that Professor Wyman never 
spoke or wrote except to a direct purpose, and because there 
was something which it was worth while to communicate. He 
bore his part also in the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
of which he was a Fellow from the year 1843, and for 
many years a councilor. To it he made a good number of 
communications ; among them one of the longest and ablest 
of his memoirs. 
Then he was from the first a member of the faculty of the 
Museum of Comparative Zoology, where his services and his 
advice were highly valued. He was chosen president of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science for the 
year 1857, but did not assume the duties of the office. 
Some notice— brief and cursory though it must be — of 
such portion of Dr. Wyman's scientific work as is recorded 
in his published papers, should form a part of this account of 
his life. 
His earliest publication, so far as we know, was an article 
in the "Boston Medical and Surgical Journal," in 1837, signed 
only with the initials of his name. It is upon " The indistinctness 
of images formed from oblique rays of light," and 
the cause of it. The handling of the subject is as characteristic 
as that of any later paper. In January, 1841, we find 
his first recorded communication of this society, " On the 
Cranium of a Seal." The first to the American Academy is 
the account of his dissection of the electrical organs of a new 
species of Torpedo, in 1843, part of a paper by his friend 
Dr. Storer, published in Silliman's Journal. In the course of 
that year, eleven communications were made to our society, 
beside the annual address, which he delivered on the 17th of 
May. The most important of these was the memoir, by Dr. 
Savage and himself, on the Black Orang or Chimpanzee of 
Africa, Troglodytes niger, published in full in the Journal of 
this society, the anatomical part by Professor Wyman. Two 
other papers of that early year, on the anatomy of two Mollusca, 
Tebennophorus Carolinensis and Glandina truncata, 
published in the fourth volume of the society's Journal, each 
with a copper plate, are noteworthy, as showing that he possessed 
from the first that happy faculty of clear, terse, and 
closely relevant exposition, and that skill and neatness of illustration 
with his pencil, which characterize all his work, both 
of research and instruction. 
Another paper of that year, " On the microscopic structure 
of the teeth of the Lepidostei, and their analogies with those 
of the Labyrinthodonts," read to this society in August, and 
published in Silliman's Journal in October, 1843, was important 
and timely. In it he demonstrated that the Labyrinthine 
structure of the teeth, considered at the time to be peculiar to 
certain sauroid reptiles, equally belong to gar-fishes, and consequently 
that many fossil teeth which had been referred by 
the evidence of this character alone to a group of reptiles 
founded upon this peculiarity, might as well belong to ancient 
sauroid fishes. 
Although not of any importance now to remember, I may 
here mention his report to this society on the PPydrachos 
Sillimani of Koch, a factitious Saurian of huge length, successfully 
exhibited in New York and elsewhere under high 
auspices, and I think also in Germany, but which Dr. Wyman 
exposed at sight, showing that it was made up of an indefinite 
number of various cetaceous vertebrae, belonging to many individuals, 
which (as was afterward ascertained) were collected 
from several localities. 
But the memoir by which Professor Wyman assured his 
position among the higher comparative anatomists was that 
communicated to and published by this society in the summer 
of 1847, in which the Gorilla was first named and introduced 
to the scientific world, and the distinctive structure and affinities 
of the animal so thoroughly made out from the study of 
the skeleton, that there was, as the great English anatomist 
remarked, " very little left to add, and nothing to correct." 
In this memoir the " Description of the habits of Troglodytes 
Gorilla" is by Dr. Thomas S. Savage, to whom, along with 
Dr. Wilson, " belongs the credit of the discovery ; " the 
Osteology of the same and the introductory history are by Dr. 
Wyman. Indeed, nearly all since made known of the Gorilla's 
structure, and of the affinities soundly deduced therefrom, 
has come from our associate's subsequent papers, 
founded on additional crania brought to him in 1849, by Dr. 
George A. Perkins of Salem ; on a nearly entire male skeleton 
of unusual size, received in 1852 from the Rev. William 
Walker, and now in Wyman's museum ; and on a large collection 
of skins and skeletons placed at his disposal in 1859, 
by Du Chaillu, along with a young Gorilla in spirits, which 
he dissected. It is in the account of this dissection that Professor 
Wyman brings out the curious fact that the skull of 
the young Gorilla and Chimpanzee bears closer resemblance 
to the adult than to the infantile human cranium. 
In Professor Wyman's library, bound up with a quarto copy 
of the Memoir by Dr. Savage and himself, is a terse but complete 
history of this subject, in his neat and clear handwriting, 
and with copies of the letters of Dr. Savage, Professor 
Owen, Mr. Walker, and M. du Chaillu. 
In the introductory part of the Memoir, Professor Wyman 
states that " the specific name, Gorilla, has been adopted, a 
term used by Hanno in describing wild men found on the 
coast of Africa, probably one of the species of the Orang." 
The name Troglodytes Gorilla is no doubt to be cited as of 
Savage and Wyman, and it was happily chosen by Professor 
Wyman, after consultation with his friend, the late Dr. A. A. 
Gould, for the reason just stated. But it is interesting to see, 
in the correspondence before me, how strenuously each of the 
joint authors deferred to the other the honor of nomenclature. 
Dr. Savage from first to last insists, in repeated and emphatic 
terms, that the scientific name shall be given by Dr. Wyman 
as the scientific describer, and that he could not himself honestly 
appropriate it. Professor Wyman in his MS. account, 
after mentioning what his portion of the Memoir was, and 
that " the determination of the differential characters on which 
the establishment of the species rests was prepared by me," 
briefly and characteristically adds : " In view of this last fact, 
Dr. Savage thought, as will be seen in his letter, that the species 
should stand in my name ; but this I declined." 
This Memoir was read before this society on the 18th of 
August, 1847, and was published before the close of the year. 
But it had not, as it appears, come to Professor Owen's knowledge 
when the latter presented to the London Zoological Society, 
on the 22d of February, 1848, a memoir founded on three 
skulls of the same species, just received from Africa through 
Captain Wagstaff. When Professor Owen received the earlier 
memoir, he wrote to compliment Professor Wyman upon it, 
substituted in a supplementary note the specific name imposed 
by Savage and Wyman, and reprinted in an appendix the 
osteological characters set forth by the latter. "It does not 
appear, however [adds Dr. Wyman] , either in the Proceedings 
or the Transactions of the [Zoological] Society, at what 
time our Memoir was published, nor that we had anticipated 
him in our description." 
It is safe to assert that in this and the subsidiary papers of 
Dr. Wyman may be found the substance of all that has since 
been brought forward, bearing upon the osteological resemblances 
and differences between men and apes. After summing 
up the evidence he concludes : — 
" The organization of the anthropoid Quadrumana justifies 
the naturalist in placing them at the head of the brute creation 
and placing them in a position in which they, of all the 
animal series, shall be nearest to man. Any anatomist, however, 
who will take the trouble to compare the skeletons of the 
Negro and Orang, cannot fail to be struck at sight with the 
wide gap which separates them. The difference between the 
cranium, the pelvis, and the conformation of the upper extremities 
of the Negro and Caucasian, sinks into comparative 
insignificance when compared with the vast difference which 
exists between the conformation of the same parts in the 
Negro and the Orang. Yet it cannot be denied, however 
wide the separation, that the Negro and Orang do afford the 
points where man and the brute, when the totality of their 
organization is considered, most nearly approach each other." 
Selecting now for further comment only some of the more 
noticeable contributions to science, we should not pass by his 
investigations of the anatomy of the blind fish of the Mammoth 
Cave. The series began in that prolific year, 1843, with 
a paper published in Silliman's Journal, and closed with an 
article in the same Journal in 1854. Although Dr. Fellkamph 
had preceded him in ascertaining the existence of rudimentary 
eyes and the special development of the fifth pair 
of nerves, yet for the whole details of the subject, and the 
minute anatomy, we are indebted to Professor Wyman. Many 
of the details, however, as well as the admirable drawings 
illustrating them, remained unpublished until 1872, when he 
placed them at Mr. Putnam's disposal, and they were brought 
out in his elaborate article in the "American Naturalist." 
Here the extraordinary development of tactile sense, taking 
the place of vision, and perfectly adapting the animal to its 
subterranean life, is completely demonstrated. 
If Professor Wyman's first piece of anatomical work was 
the preparation of a skeleton of a bull-frog, in his undergraduate 
days, his most elaborate memoir is that on the 
anatomy of the nervous system of the same animal (Rana 
pipiens), published in the " Smithsonian Contributions," in 
1852. 
Anything like an analysis of this capital investigation and 
exposition would much overpass our limits. For, although 
the special task he assigns to himself is the description of the 
nervous system of a single Batrachian, chiefly of its peripheral 
portion, and of the changes undergone during metamorphosis, 
he is led on to the consideration of several abstruse or controverted 
questions ; — such, for instance, as the attempts that 
have been made to homologize the nervous system of Articulates 
with that of Vertebrates, upon which he has some acute 
criticism ; — the theories that have been propounded respecting 
the functions of the cerebellum and its relation to locomotion, 
which he tests in a characteristic way by a direct appeal 
to facts ; — the supposition of Cuvier that the special enlargements 
of the spinal cord are in proportion to the force of the 
respective limbs supplied therefrom; which he controverts 
decisively by similar appeal, an extract from which I beg 
leave to append in a note. 1 
So, in describing the structure of the optic nerves in the 
frog, and the development of the eye and optic lobes, he proceeds 
to remark : — 
" The instances of Proteus and Amblyopsis naturally suggest 
the questions, whether one and the same part may not 
combine functions wholly different in different animals, and 
whether the same may not hold true with regard to the cerebral 
organs which is known to obtain with regard to the 
skeleton, the teeth, the tongue, and the nose, that identical or 
homologous parts in different animals may perform functions 
wholly distinct. If the doctrine here suggested can be admitted 
(and if this were the place, facts could be cited in support of 
it), may we not find in it an explanation of many inconsistencies 
which now exist between the results of comparative 
anatomy and of physiology ? " 
Then, in his chapter on the philosophical anatomy of the 
cranial nerves and skull, after showing that there are but three 
pairs of cranio-spinal nerves, he takes up the controverted 
question as to the number of vertebrae which compose the 
1 " If by force is meant the muscular energy and development of the 
limbs, this statement does not appear to he sustained in the present instance, 
nor in many other instances brought to notice by comparative 
anatomy. In man the brachial enlargement is always larger than the 
crural, though the legs are so much more powerfully developed than the 
arms, and the same is true of the greater number of mammals. In frogs 
there is a still greater disproportion between legs and arms, yet there is 
not a corresponding difference in the size of the bulgings. They cannot, 
therefore, he said to be in proportion to the muscular force only of the 
limbs, hut correspond far more nearly to the acuteness of the sense of 
touch, which in man and mammals is more delicate in the hands and arms 
than in the legs and feet. In bats, it is true that the muscular force of 
the arms is greater than that of the legs, and that the brachial far surpasses 
the crural enlargement ; but, at the same time, the sense of touch 
in the membranes of the wings is exalted to a most extraordinary degree. 
In birds the posterior bulging is almost universally the largest, though 
this condition is in part dependent upon the presence of the rhomboidal 
sinus. In these animals, while the muscular energy of the wings is the 
most developed, the sensibility of the feet is the more acute." 
skull, and supports the opinion that they also are only three 
in a characteristic manner. 1 
Of this whole memoir it is thought that, notwithstanding 
the great advance which has been made in comparative anatomy 
during the twenty-five years which have elapsed since 
it was published, its importance to the student has not at all 
diminished. 
Next to this in extent and value may be ranked Professor 
Wyman's paper on the development of the common skate of 
our waters (Raia Batis), communicated to the American 
Academy in 1864, and published among its Memoirs.^ It 
gives an account of the peculiar egg-case of the Selachians, 
and of the several stages of the development of the embryo 
skate, expressed in the concise and clear language — as little 
technical as possible — for which he was distinguished, and 
leading up to not a few problems in comparative anatomy, 
morphology, or systematic zoology, — problems^ which Professor 
Wyman never evaded when they came directly in his 
way, and seldom handled without making some real contribution 
to their elucidation. For instance, in describing the 
external branchial fringes of the young skate, he notes the 
agreement of this character in the Batrachians ; and in 
studying the seven branchial fissures of the embryo, he is 
1 " The conclusions which have been drawn from the statements made 
above are as follows : that in frogs the vagus comprises the glossopharyngeal 
and accessory nerves ; that the trigeminus comprises the facial, the 
abducens and in the salamanders the patheticus and portions of the motor 
communis ; that other evidence sustains the hypothesis, that the whole of 
the motor communis is a dependence of the trigeminus ; if to these we 
add the hypoglossus (which in frogs is exceptionally a spmal nerve), we 
shall have three pairs of cranial nerves, each having all the characters of 
a common spinal nerve, namely, motor and sensitive roots and a ganglion ; 
that there are no nerves to indicate a fourth vertebra, unless the special 
sense nerves are considered ; if these are admitted as indications, then we 
must presuppose either two pairs of nerves to each vertebra, or the existence 
of six vertebrfe, which is a larger number than can be accounted for 
on an osteological basis. The functions and mode of development of the 
special sense nerves we have taken as affording sufficient grounds for 
considering them as of a peculiar order, and not to be classified with common 
spinal nerves." 
brought into contact with the view of Huxley, that the formation 
of the external ear is by involution of the integument. 
After confirming the contrary observations of Reichert on the 
embryo pig, he concludes that " the first of the seven branchial 
fissures of the embryo skate is converted into the spiracle, 
which is the homologue of the Eustachian tube and the outer 
ear-canal." After a full discussion of the homology of the 
upper jaw in sharks and skates, under the light afforded by 
his investigation of the embryo skate, he suggests that the 
cartilage which extends from the olfactory fossae towards the 
pectoral fin is the probable homologue of a maxillary bone, 
and that in the lobe, the homologue of an intermaxillary ; 
that, if so, the skates and proteiform reptiles agree in having 
the nostrils open in front of the dental arch ; that while in 
all Batrachians the nasal groove becomes closed, in the skate 
it remains permanently open ; and finally, that this view, if 
confirmed, " will add another feature which justifies Owen, 
Agassiz, and others, in dissenting from Cuvier so far as to 
give the Selachians a place in the zoological series higher than 
that of the bony fishes. But at the same time, it will give 
corroborative proof of the correctness of Cuvier's view, that 
' the rudiments of the maxillaries and intermaxillaries . . . 
are evident in the skeleton.' '' 
In attempting these analyses, I am drifting into a fault 
which Professor Wyman never committed, that of being too 
long. So I must leave many of his papers unmentioned, and 
barely refer to two or three others which cannot be passed 
over. The most noteworthy of the shorter papers, however, 
are upon less technical or more generally interesting topics, 
so that we have need only to be reminded of them. Among 
them are his " Observations on the Development of the Surinam 
Toad," the paper on Anablcps Gronovii, and that " On 
some unusual Modes of Gestation." The importance of these 
papers lies, not in being accounts of some of the most striking 
curiosities of the animal world, but in the sagacity and quickness 
with which he discerned, and the clearness with which 
he taught the lessons to be learned from them. Any good 
zoologist, with the same excellent opportunities, would have 
worked out all the details of the development of the Surinam 
toads in the skin of the back of their mother, and would 
equally have noted the morphological significance of the 
branchiae and tail, that are never to know anything of the 
element they are adapted for ; but Dr. Wyman remarks upon 
the development of the limbs independently of the vertebral 
axis, as showing that whatever view be taken of their homology, 
they are something superadded to it, and not evolved 
from it ; he notes how the whole yelk mass is moulded into 
a spiral intestine ; and that the embryo at the end of incubation 
forms a larger and heavier mass than existed in the 
egg when it commenced, — showing that there was an absorption 
of material furnished by the dermal sac of the mother, 
— " a solitary instance among Batrachians, if not among reptiles 
generally, in which the embryo is nourished at the expense 
of materials derived from the parent." From this he 
is led (in the last paper above mentioned) to infer the probability 
that the developed larvae of Hylodes lineatus carried 
about inland upon the back of their mother, and destitute 
of limbs adapted to terrestrial locomotion — may depend 
upon a secretion from the body for needful sustenance, —an 
interesting and rudimentary foreshadowing of mammalian 
life, of which he discerned the bearings. 
His " Description of a Double Foetus " (in the " Boston 
Medical and Surgical Journal," March, 1866) gives him the 
opportunity of briefly recording some of the results of his 
studies of the development of double monsters, and to bring 
out his view, that " the force, whatever it be, which regulates 
the symmetrical distribution of matter in a normal or abnormal 
embryo, has its analogy, if anywhere, in those known 
as polar forces ; " that, " studying the subject in the most 
general manner, there are striking resemblances between the 
distribution of matter capable of assuming a polar condition, 
and free to move around a magnet, and the distribution of 
matter around the nervous axis of an embryo." That this is 
not one of those vague conceptions by which many speculators 
set about to explain that of which they know little by means 
of that of which they know less, but that he had striking 
parallelisms to adduce, the close of this striking paper 
shows. 
The subject of fore and hind symmetry, thus brought directly 
under notice, had been broached by Dr. Wyman several years 
before. He returned to it the year following, in his very important 
morphological paper, " On Symmetry and Homology 
in Limbs," read to this society in June, 1867, and published 
in the Proceedings of that date. It is interesting to observe 
with what caution and restraint he handled this doctrine of 
"reversed repetitions," which has since been freely developed 
by one of his pupils who has a special predilection for speculative 
morphology, Professor Burt Wilder. 
Professor Wyman's " Notes on the Cells of the Bee," in the 
" Proceedings of the American Academy " for January, 1866, 
is a characteristic specimen of his way of coming directly 
down to the facts, and making them tell their own story. I 
could not recapitulate his results much more briefly than he 
records them in his paper. I need not recall to you how 
neatly he made this investigation, and represented some of the 
results, filling the comb with plaster-of-jaaris and then cutting 
it across midway, so that the observations might be made and 
the cells measured just where they are most nearly perfect ; 
and then printing impressions of the comb upon the woodblock, 
he reproduces on the pages of his article the exact 
outlines of the cells, with all their irregularities and imperfections. 
But I cannot refrain from citing a portion of his 
remarks at the close : — 
" Here, as is so often the case elsewhere in nature, the typeform 
is an ideal one ; and with this, real forms seldom or 
never coincide. . . . An assertion, like that of Lord 
Brougham, that there is in the cell of the bee ' perfect agreement 
' between theory and observation, in view of the analogies 
of nature, is more likely to be wrong than right ; and his 
assertion in the case before us is certainly wrong. Much 
error would have been avoided if those who have discussed 
the structure of the bee's cell had adopted the plan followed 
by Mr. Darwin, and studied the habits of the cell-making 
insects comparatively, beginning with the cells of the humble- 
bee, following with those of wasps and hornets, then with those 
of the Mexican bees (Melipona), and finally with those of the 
common hive-bee. In this way, while they would have found 
that there is a constant approach to the perfect form, they 
would at the same time have been prepared for the fact, that 
even in the cell of the hive-bee perfection is not reached. The 
isolated study of anything in natural history is a fruitful 
source of error." 
Let me add to this important aphorism its fellow, which I 
have from him, but know not if he ever printed it. "No 
single experiment in physiology is worth anything." 
The spirit of these aphorisms directed all his work. It is 
well exemplified in his experimental researches — the last 
which I can here refer to — upon " The formation of Infusoria 
in boiled solutions of organic matter, inclosed in hermetically 
sealed vessels and supplied with pure air,'' and its supplement, 
" Observations and Experiments on Living Organisms 
in bleated Water," published in the " American Journal 
of Science and Arts," the first in the year 1862, the other in 
1867. Milne-Edwards could not have known the man, when 
he questioned the accuracy of the first series because they do 
not agree with those of Pasteur, and thought the difference 
in the results depended upon a defective mode of conducting 
the experiments. As Dr. Wyman remarks, in a note to the 
second series, "the recent experiments of Dr. Child of Oxford, 
and those reported in this communication, are sufficient 
answer to the criticisms of M. Edwards." Then, as to his 
thoroughness, most persons would have rested on the results 
of his thirty-three well-devised experiments proving " that the 
boiled solutions of organic matter made use of, exposed only to 
air which has passed through tubes heated to redness, became 
the seat of infusorial life ; " but all would not have concluded 
that, after all, they " throw but little light on the immediate 
source from which the organisms have been derived," nor 
would many have closed an impartial summary of the oppos- 
ing views in this judicial way : — 
" If, on the one hand, it is urged that all organisms, in so 
far as the early history of them is known, are derived from 
ova, and therefore from analogy we must ascribe a similar 
origin to these minute beings the early history of which we do 
not know, it may be urged with equal force, on the other 
hand, that all ova and spores, in so far as we know anything 
about them, are destroyed by prolonged boiling ; therefore from 
analogy we are equally bound to infer that Vibrios, Bacterians, 
etc., could not have been derived from ova, since these 
would have all been destroyed by the conditions to which they 
have been subjected. The argument from analogy is as strong 
in the one case as in the other." 
Returning to the subject again a few years later, with a 
critical series of twenty experiments, each of three, five, ten, 
fifteen, or even twenty flasks, used by way of checks and comparisons, 
— a rigorous experimenter would have been satisfied 
when he had proved that sealed solutions subjected to a heat 
of at least 212° for from one to four hours, became the seat 
of infusorial life, at least of such as Vibrios, Bacterians, and 
Monads, while all infusoria having the faculty of locomotion 
were shown by a special series of experiments to lose this at 
a temperature of 120° or at most 134° Fahr. But Professor 
Wyman carried the boiling up to five hours, and in these 
flasks no infusoria of any kind appeared. The question of 
abiogenesis stands to-day very much where Professor Wyman 
left it seven years ago. 
I must omit all notice of the ethnological work which has 
occupied his later years, merely referring to the seven annual 
" Reports of the Trustees of the Peabody Museum of American 
Archaeology and Ethnology," of which he was curator. 
The last of these, issued just before the writer's death, contain 
the principal results of his investigations of the human 
remains he collected in the shell-heaps of east Florida, and 
convincing evidence of the cannibalism of those who made 
them. A fuller memoir, embodying all his observations of 
the last six winters upon the Florida shell-mounds, was sent 
to the printer just before he died. 
The thought that fills our minds upon a survey even so incomplete 
as this is : How much he did, how well he did it all, 
and how simply and quietly ! We know that our associate, 
though never hurried, was never idle, and that his great repose 
of manner covered a sustained energy; but I suspect 
that none of us, without searching out and collecting his published 
papers, had adequately estimated their number and 
their value. There is nothing forth-puttiug about them, 
nothing adventitious, never even a phrase to herald a matter 
which he deemed important. 
His work as a teacher was of the same quality. Fie was 
one of the best lecturers I ever heard, although, and partly 
because, he was most unpretending. You never thought of the 
speaker, nor of the gifts and acquisitions which such clear 
exposition were calling forth, — only of what he was simply 
telling and showing you. Then to those who, like his pupils 
and friends, were in personal contact with him, there was the 
added charm of a most serene and sweet temper. He was 
truthful and conscientious to the very core. His perfect freedom, 
in lectures as well as in writing, and no less so in daily 
conversation, from all exaggeration, false perspective, and 
factitious adornment, was the natural expression of his innate 
modesty and refined taste, and also of his reverence for the 
exact truth. 
It has been a pleasure to learn, from former college students, 
who hardly ever saw him except in the lecture room, that he 
gave to them much the same impression of his gifts and 
graces and sterling worth, that he gave us who knew him 
intimately — so transparent was he and natural. 
With all his quick sense of justice, and no lack of occasion 
for controversy, it seemed to cost him no effort to avoid it 
altogether. He made no enemies, and was surrounded by 
troops of life-long friends. When he first went abroad, in 
1841, he was told by some near friends, who recognized his 
promise, that a chair of natural history in his alma mater 
would soon have to be filled, and that he should be presented 
as a candidate. In the winter following, the present incum- 
bent, responding to an invitation to visit Boston, which he 
had never seen, and to consider if he would be a candidate, 
then first heard of Wyman's name and his friends' expectations 
or hopes ; whereupon he dismissed the subject from his 
mind. Probably he felt more surprise than did Dr. Wyman 
when notified, a few months afterward, of the choice of the 
corporation. The exigencies of the botanic garden probably 
overbore other considerations. I doubt if Dr. Wyman ever 
had an envious feeling. Certain it is that no one welcomed 
the new professor with truer cordiality, or proved himself a 
more constant friend. 
In these days it is sure to be asked how an anatomist, physiologist, 
and morphologist like Professor Wyman regarded 
the most remarkable scientific movement of his time, the revival 
and apparent prevalence of doctrines of evolution. As 
might be expected, he was neither an advocate or an opponent. 
He was not one of those persons who quickly make up their 
minds, and announce their opinions, with a confidence inversely 
proportionate to their knowledge. He could consider 
long, and hold his judgment in suspense. How well he could 
do this appears from an early, and so far as I know, his only 
published presentation of the topic, in a short review of 
Owen's " Monograph of the Aye-Aye " (in Am. Journ. Science, 
Sept., 1863) — the paper in which Professor Owen's 
acceptance of evolution, but not of natural selection, was 
promulgated. Dr. Wyman compares Owen's view with that 
of Darwin (to whom he had already communicated interesting 
and novel illustrations of the play of natural selection) ; and 
he adds some acute remarks upon a rather earlier speculation 
by Mr. Agassiz, in which the latter suggests that the species 
of animals might have been created as eggs rather than as 
adults. He states the case between the two general views 
with perfect impartiality, and the bent of his own mind is 
barely discernible. In due time he satisfied himself as to 
which of them was the more probable, or, in any case, the 
more fertile hypothesis. As to this I may venture to take the 
liberty to repeat the substance of a conversation which I had 
with him some time after the death of the lamented Agassiz, 
and not long before his own. I report the substance only, 
not the words. 
Agassiz repeated to me, he said, a remark made to him by 
Humboldt, to the effect that Cuvier made a great mistake, 
and missed a great opportunity, when he took the side he did 
in the famous controversy with Geoffroy St. Hilaire ; he should 
have accepted the doctrines of morphology, and brought his 
vast knowledge of comparative anatomy and zoology, and 
his unequaled powers, to their illustration. Had he done so, 
instead of gaining by his superior knowledge some temporary 
and doubtful victories in a lost cause, his preeminence for all 
our time would have been assured and complete. I thought, 
continued Wyman, that there was a parallel case before me, 
that if Agassiz had brought his vast stores of knowledge in 
zoology, embryology, and palaeontology, his genius for morphology, 
and all his quickness of apprehension and fertility in 
illustration, to the elucidation and support of the doctrine of 
the progressive development of species, science in our day 
would have gained much, some grave misunderstandings been 
earlier rectified, and the permanent fame of Agassiz been 
placed on a broader and higher basis even than it is now. 
Upon one point Wyman was clear from the beginning. He 
did not wait until evolutionary doctrines were about to prevail, 
before he judged them to be essentially philosophical 
and healthful, "in accordance with the order of nature as 
commonly manifested in her works," and that they need not 
disturb the foundations of natural theology. 
Perhaps none of us can be trusted to judge of such a question 
impartially, upon the bare merits of the case ; but Wyman's 
judgment was as free from bias as that of any one I 
ever knew. Not at all, however, in this case from indifference 
or unconcern. He was not only, philosophically, a convinced 
theist, in all hours and under all " variations of mood and 
tense," but personally a devout man, an habitual and reverent 
attendant upon Christian worship and ministrations. 
Those of us who attended his funeral must have felt the 
appropriateness for the occasion of the words which were 
there read from the Psalmist : — 
"The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
showeth his handy-work. . . . O Lord, how manifold are thy 
works ! In wisdom hast thou made them all ; the earth is 
full of thy riches ; so is this great and wide sea, wherein are 
things creeping innumerable, both great and small beasts. 
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest 
the face of the earth." 
These are the works which our associate loved to investigate, 
and this the spirit in which he contemplated them. Not less 
apposite were the Beatitudes that followed : 
" Blessed are the meek ; blessed are the peace-makers ; 
blessed are the merciful ; blessed are the pure in heart." 
Those who knew him best, best know how well he exemplified 
them. 
DANIEL HANBURY. 
Not long ago we called attention to a most valuable book, 
the " Pharmacographia, a History of Drugs," by Professor 
Fliickiger of Strasburg and Daniel Hanbury of London, the 
first-fruits of much investigation, the precursor, as was hoped, 
of more extended similar works by the English author. We 
have now sadly to record the decease of Mr. Hanbury, of 
enteric typhoid, on the 24th of March, at his residence on 
Clapham Common, in the fiftieth year of his age. The obituary 
and biographical notices which have appeared in the 
London scientific journals and in the Proceedings of the 
learned societies, as well as loving individual tributes to an 
endeared memory, have given expression to the loss which has 
been sustained, and delineated the outlines of a most worthy 
and winning character. The loss is deplored, personally and 
scientifically, over wider circles and on this side of the Atlantic. 
The pupil and friend of Pareira and his successor in his 
line of work, an adept in pharmaceutical knowledge, a keen 
botanist, and a most assiduous and conscientious investigator, 
a man of simple and pure tastes, and happily of sufficient 
means, he had just withdrawn wholly from business in the 
noted house in which he had an inherited share, so that he 
might devote his powers and acquisitions without distraction 
to the natural history of drugs and useful vegetable products. 
He had already done much : more than sixty articles were contributed 
by him to a single journal, the editor of which declares 
that "the quality of what he did was almost faultless," 
that " he never wrote without having original information to 
impart, and his papers uniformly bear evidence of careful 
investigation and thorough knowledge." The Transactions 
and Journal of the Linnaean Society (of which he was repeat- 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., ix. 476. (1875.) 
edly a councilor and the treasurer at the time of his death) 
contain several of his papers. His first published paper, 
"On Turnsole," appeared in 1850 ; his latest, on the " Countess 
Chinchon and the Cinchona Genus," appeared, since his 
death, in "The Academy" of the 3d of April. An ardent 
botanist and lover of plants, he traveled much in the south of 
Europe, accompanied Dr. Hooker in his explorations of Lebanon, 
and took an active interest especially in the introduction 
of officinal plants and in ornamental cultivation. With one 
villa-garden on the shores of the Mediterranean — that of his 
brother at Mortola — his memory to us is indelibly associated. 
Although remarkably self-reliant, Mr. Flanbury was the opposite 
of self -asserting or ambitious ; but his sterling worth was 
soon recognized by the principal learned societies and associations. 
He was early chosen into the Royal Society and served 
upon its council in 1873. Born and educated in the Society 
of Friends, he remained a devout and attached member of it, 
while the graces and the goodness of his character endeared 
him to all who knew him. With the sense of personal loss 
his scientific comrades mingle deep regrets that a career of 
unusual usefulness and promise is cut short, and that in a line 
in which, it is to be feared, he leaves no successor. Hanburia 
Mexicana, a striking Cucurbitaceous genus, commemorated 
his services to botany. 
ALEXANDER BRAUN. 
We announce with sorrow the death of this excellent botanist, 
which took place in Berlin, on the 29th of March, after a 
short illness. Systematic botanists of the first class are everywhere 
rare, and especially in Germany, where they have gone 
out of fashion, all attention being turned to histology and the 
like. In Braun's earlier days there was a goodly array of 
systematic botanists in Germany ; at his decease there are 
very few of mark, although signs of revival are apparent. 
Alexander Braun was born at Ratisbon, May 10, 1805, but 
was brought up at Carlsruhe, where his father became a trusted 
officer in the post-office department. Fifty years ago there 
was a knot of closely - allied students at the university of 
Heidelberg, consisting of Braun, Carl Schimper, Agassiz, and 
Engelmann. Two of them were transferred to our own soil ; 
the latter is now the sole survivor. Three of them went 
soon to Munich, where Oken, Schelling, Dollinger, and Martius 
were teaching ; but Braun, Agassiz, and Engelmann met 
again as fellow - students at Paris in 1832. The first two 
became allied afterwards by the marriage of Agassiz with 
Braun's sister. About the time that Dr. Engelmann came to 
the United States, Braun was made professor of botany and 
zoology in the Polytechnic School of Carlsruhe. In 1846 he 
took the chair of botany in the university of Freiburg in the 
Breisgau ; was transferred to Giessen in 1850 ; but in the 
spring of 1851 was called to Berlin, as the successor to Link 
and Kunth, taking charge of the botanic garden as well as of 
the professorship. Although he had nearly reached the age of 
seventy-two, and felt the full weight of his years, yet he was 
assiduously attending to his official duties when he was suddenly 
prostrated by acute disease of the chest, terminating 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xiii. 471. (1877.) 
fatally. Although learned in almost every department of his 
science, his forte, like that of Agassiz, was morphology, and 
his systematic work mainly among the higher and some of the 
lower Cryptogamia, Marsilia, Isoetes, Chara, etc. Although his 
communications to the scientific journals began as early as 
the year 1822, when he was only seventeen years old, his 
first contribution to science, of much extent and of high and 
permanent value, was his memoir on the arrangement of the 
scales of Pine-cones, etc., published in 1830. With this publication 
began the present knowledge of phyllotaxis. It is 
well understood that the first steps were taken by his fellowstudent 
Carl Schimper, and that the early investigations were 
pursued in common by the two. But Schimper published 
nothing, or next to nothing, either then or since, although he 
lived until the year 1867. His name in connection with the 
subject is preserved by the favorable mention of his companions 
and contemporaries ; but Braun's treatise was timely and 
fruitful, and became classical. Braun's ability for the philosophical 
treatment of vegetable morphology and development 
was manifested in his next large paper, namely, in his memoir 
entitled " Rejuvenescence in Nature," especially in the 
life and development of plants. This was first published at 
Freiburg in 1849-50, and again at Leipsic in 1851, and an 
English translation of it was published by the Ray Society in 
1853. Of a similar character, and marked with equal acuteness, 
is his essay on " The Vegetable Individual in its relation 
to Species," etc., published in 1853, at Berlin, and which, in a 
translation by a pupil of mine, was mainly reproduced in this 
Journal (May and September, 1855). He reaches the conclusion 
— which would now be more confidently expressed — 
" that the individual appears in its full import only in the 
higher steps of the series of created beings." 
In his systematical work, Braun was exceedingly laborious, 
persevering, and conscientious. When we add that throughout 
the riper and what should have been the most productive 
years of his life, he was overtasked with official duties and 
cares, we shall not wonder that much which he hoped to accomplish 
is left undone. His work upon Marsilia, Pilularia, 
and Isoetes may be essentially complete. But his prolonged 
studies of Chara, which began forty years ago, and the completion 
of which would have crowned his career, have probably 
not been finished, or brought into such form that the 
results may be fully secured. 
His influence as a teacher is said to have been great ; as 
an investigator he stood in the first rank among the botanists 
of our time ; as a man, his simple, earnest, and transparently 
truthful character won the admiration and love of all who 
knew him. 
CHARLES PICKERING. 
Charles Pickering, M. D., died in Boston, of pneumonia, 
on the 17th of March, 1878, in the seventy-third year of his 
age. He was of a noted New England stock, being a grandson 
of Colonel Timothy Pickering, a member of Washington's 
military family, and of his first cabinet as President ; and he 
was elected into this Academy under the presidency of his 
uncle, John Pickering. -He was born on Starucca Creek, on 
the Upper Susquehanna, in the northern part of Pennsylvania, 
at a settlement made on a grant of land taken up by his 
grandfather, who then resided there. His father, Timothy 
Pickering, Jr., died at the age of thirty years, leaving to the 
care of the mother — who lived to a good old age — the two 
sons, Charles and his brother Edward, who were much united 
in their earlier and later lives, and were not long divided in 
death, the subject of this notice having been for only a year 
the survivor. 
Dr. Pickering was a member of the class of 1823 at Harvard 
College, but left before graduation. He studied medicine, 
and took the degree of M. D. at the Harvard Medical 
School in 1826. Living in these earlier years at Salem, he 
was associated with the late William Oakes in botanical exploration 
; and it is believed that the two first explored the 
White Mountains together, following in the steps of the first 
botanist to ascend Mount Washington, Dr. Manasseh Cutler 
of Essex County, and of Francis Boott and the still surviving 
Dr. Bigelow. His taste for natural history showed itself in 
boyhood, both for botany and zoology, and probably decided 
his choice of a profession. He may have intended to practise 
medicine for a livelihood, when, about the year 1829, he took 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, xiii. 
414. (1878.) 
up his residence at Philadelphia ; but it is probable that he 
was attracted thither more by the facilities that city offered 
for the pursuit of natural history than by its renown as a centre 
of medical education. We soon find him acting as one of 
the curators of the Academy of Natural Sciences, and also as 
librarian, and with reputation established as the most erudite 
and sharp-sighted of all the young naturalists of that region. 
His knowledge then, as in mature years, was encyclopaedic 
and minute ; and his bent was toward a certain subtlety and 
exhaustiveness of investigation, which is characteristic of his 
later writings. Still, in those days in which he was looked up 
to as an oracle, and consulted as a dictionary by his co-workers, 
he had published nothing which can now be recalled, 
except a brief essay on the geographical distribution and 
leading characteristics of the United States flora, which very 
few of our day have ever seen. 
When the United States surveying and exploring expedition 
to the South Seas, which sailed under command of then 
Lieutenant Charles Wilkes in the autumn of 1838, was first 
organized under Commodore T. Ap-Catesby Jones, about two 
years before, Dr. Pickering's reputation was such that he was 
at once selected as the principal zoologist. Subsequently, as 
the plan expanded, others were added. Yet the scientific 
fame of that expedition most largely rests upon the collections 
and the work of Dr. Pickering and his surviving associate, 
Professor Dana, the latter taking, in addition to the geology, 
the Corals and the Crustacea, other special departments of 
zoology being otherwise provided for by the accession of Mr. 
Couthouy and Mr. Peale. Dr. Pickering, although retaining 
the ichthyology, particularly turned his attention during 
the three and a half years' voyage of circumnavigation to 
anthropology, and to the study of the geographical distribution 
of animals and plants ; to the latter especially affected by 
or as evidence of the operations, movements, and diffusion of 
the races of man. To these, the subjects of his predilections 
and to investigations bearing upon them, all his remaining 
life was assiduously devoted. The South Pacific exploring 
expedition visited very various parts of the world; but it 
necessarily left out regions of the highest interest to the anthropological 
investigator, those occupied in early times by the 
race to which we belong, and by the peoples with which the 
Aryan race has been most in contact. Desirous to extend his 
personal observations as far as possible, Dr. Pickering, a year 
after the return of the expedition, and at his own charges, 
crossed the Atlantic, visited Egypt, Arabia, the eastern part 
of Africa, and western and northern India. Then, in 1848, 
he published his volume on " The Races of Man, and their 
Geographical Distribution," being the ninth volume of the 
" Reports of the Wilkes' Exploring Expedition." Some time 
afterward, he prepared, for the fifteenth volume of this series, 
an extensive work on the " Geographical Distribution of Animals 
and Plants." But, in the course of the printing, the appropriations 
by Congress intermitted or ceased, and the publication 
of the results of the celebrated expedition was suspended. 
Publication it could hardly be called : for Congress 
printed only one hundred copies, in a sumptuous form, for 
presentation to states and foreign courts ; and then the several 
authors were allowed to use the types and copperplates 
for printing as many copies as they required, and could pay 
for. Under this privilege, Dr. Pickering brought out in 1854 
a small edition of the first part of his essay, — perhaps the 
most important part, — and in 1876 a more bulky portion, 
"On Plants and Animals in their Wild State," which is 
largely a transcript of the note-book memoranda as jotted 
down at the time of observation or collection. 
These are all his publications, excepting some short communications 
to scientific journals and the proceedings of 
learned societies to which he belonged. But he is known to 
have been long and laboriously engaged upon a work for 
which, under his exhaustive treatment, a lifetime seems hardly 
sufficient ; a digest, in fact, of all that is known of all the 
animals and plants with which civilized man has had to do 
from the earliest period traceable by records. When Dr. 
Pickering died, he was carrying this work through the press 
at his own individual expense, had already in type five or six 
hundred quarto pages, and it is understood that the remainder, 
of about equal extent, is ready for the printer. This formidable 
treatise is entitled " Man's Record of his own Existence." 
Its character is indicated in the brief introductory 
sentences : — 
" In the distribution of species over the globe, the order of 
Nature has been obscured through the interference of man. 
He has transported animals and plants to countries where 
they were previously unknown ; extirpating the forest and 
cultivating the soil, until at length the face of the globe itself 
is changed. To ascertain the amount of this interference, 
displaced species must be distinguished, and traced each to 
its original home. Detached observations have already been 
given in the twenty-first and succeeding chapters of my 
' Races of Man ' ; but when such observations are extended 
to all parts of the globe, the accumulated facts require some 
plan of arrangement. A list will naturally assume the 
chronological order, beginning with Egypt, the country that 
contains the earliest records of the human family, and receding 
geographically from the same central point of reference." 
Then, starting with " 4713 B. O," and " 4491 B. C, beginning 
of the first Great Year in the Egyptian reckoning," 
he begins the list, which, under the running heading of 
" Chronological Arrangement of Accompanying Animals and 
Plants," first treats of the vegetables and animals mentioned 
m the book of Genesis, and of the " Commencement of Bedouin 
or Nomadic Life in the Desert ; " passes to the " Colonization 
of Egypt," and to critical notices (philological and 
natural-historical) of its plants and animals, as well their earliest 
mention as their latest known migrations ; reaches the 
beginning of the Christian era at about the 470th page ; and 
so proceeds, till our wonder at the patience and the erudition 
of the writer passes all bounds. We are ready to agree with 
a biographer who declares that our associate was " a living 
encyclopaedia of knowledge," — that there never was a naturalist 
" who had made more extended and minute original 
explorations ; " and we fully agree that "no one ever had less 
a passion or a gift for display ; " " that he was engaged dur- 
J ng a long life in the profoundest studies, asking neither fame 
nor money, nor any other reward, but simply the privilege of 
gaining knowledge and of storing it up in convenient forms 
for the service of others ; " that " the love of knowledge was 
the one passion of his life," and that " he asked no richer 
satisfaction than to search for it as for hidden treasure." He 
was singularly retiring and reticent, very dry in ordinary 
intercourse, but never cynical ; delicate and keen in perception 
and judgment ; just, upright, and exemplary in every 
relation ; and to those who knew him well communicative, 
sympathetic, and even genial. In the voyage of circumnavigation 
he was the soul of industry, and a hardy explorer. 
The published narrative of the commander shows that he took 
a part in every fatiguing excursion or perilous ascent. Perhaps 
the most singular peril (recorded in the narrative) was 
that in which this light-framed man once found himself on 
the Peruvian Andes, when he was swooped upon by a condor, 
evidently minded to carry off the naturalist who was contemplating 
the magnificent ornithological specimen. 
Dr. Pickering married in the year 1851, and leaves a widow, 
but no children to inherit his honored name. 
ELIAS MAGNUS FRIES. 
Elias Magnus Fries died at Upsal on February 8, in 
the eighty-fourth year of his age, five months after the celebration, 
in which he was able to take some part, of the four 
hundredth anniversary of the foundation of that university, 
and a month after the hundredth anniversary of the death of 
Linnaeus. Born, as was Linnaeus, in Smoland, a southern 
province of Sweden, and like him called in middle age to the 
renowned Scandinavian university, he might be regarded as 
the most distinguished of Linnaeus's successors, except for the 
fact that he did not occupy the chair of Linnaeus ; for when, 
more than forty years ago, Fries, then demonstrator of botany 
at Lund, was called to Upsal, Wahlenberg was in the 
botanical chair, and Fries was made professor of practical 
economy. His son, however, by the retirement of Areschoug, 
is now botanical professor. 
Fries's earliest work, the first part of his Novitiae, appeared 
in the year 1814, when the author was only twenty years old. 
His last of any moment, a new edition of his " Hymenomycetes 
Europaei," was published on his eighty-first birthday, 
August 15, 1874. Most of the sixty intervening years are 
marked by some publication from his busy and careful hand. 
His work was wholly in systematic botany, and of the highest 
character of its kind. In Phaenogamous botany, it related 
chiefly to the Scandinavian flora, in which for critical judgment 
he had no superior ; in Mycology, of which he was the 
reformator and to a good degree in Lichenology, he had no 
rival except as regards microscopical research. The modern 
microscope did not exist when he began his work, and, while 
showing how much can be done without it, he may too long 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Science, xiii. 453. 
(1878.) 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 
412 
have underrated its value. But he lived to see it confirm 
many conclusions which his insight foresaw, and solve riddles 
which he had pondered, but was unable to divine. He was 
the prince, Nestor, and last survivor of an excellent school of 
systematic botanists, whose teachers were taught by Linnasus 
or his contemporaries. 
JACOB BIGELOW. 
Dr. Jacob Bigelow died at his residence in Boston, on 
the 10th of January last, near the close of the ninety-second 
year of his age. 
While we would pay the tribute due to his memory as by 
far the most venerable of American botanists, the last survivor 
of a school in this country which culminated half a century 
ago, it should also be remembered that he was even at that 
time distinguished in their scientific avocations, and that from 
middle to old age he was among the most eminent of physicians. 
It is not often that we can contemplate a life so long, 
so richly various, and so well-rounded as his. He was born 
in Sudbury, Massachusetts, on February 27, 1787 ; and his 
father was the minister of the town. That almost goes without 
saying, most of our distinguished professional men of his and 
the preceding generations in New England having been the 
sons of country ministers. He was graduated at Harvard 
College in the year 1806, Alexander H. Everett and the late 
Dr. J. (J. Cogswell being among the most notable of his classmates, 
all of whom he long survived. He directly took up 
the study of medicine, was licensed as a practitioner in 1809, 
and after attending one course of lectures in Philadelphia, 
took his degree of M. D. at Harvard in 1810, and established 
himself in Boston. There he was a practising physician for 
about sixty years, and since the death of his senior, Dr. James 
Jackson, probably the most eminent one. What turned his 
attention to botany we know not. He early showed an abidlng 
taste for poetry. His commencement part was a poem, 
and he delivered a <£. B. K. poem not long after. At about 
the same time, however, he gave a course of popular botanical 
lectures in Boston, in connection with Professor Peck, 
who must have been installed as natural-history professor at 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xvii. 263. (1879.) 
Cambridge while Dr. Bigelow was a medical student. The 
latter possessed the gift of exposition which Dr. Peck lacked ; 
and it naturally came to pass that Dr. Bigelow repeated this 
course of lectures alone for a year or two afterward. 
In the spring of 1814 he brought out the first edition of his 
" Florula Bostoniensis," the book which, mainly in its second 
edition, has been the manual for New England herborization 
down to a recent day, or rather to a day which seems to us recent. 
The original volume, of 268 octavo pages, describes the 
plants which " have been collected during the two last seasons 
in the vicinity of Boston, within a circuit of from five to ten 
miles," exceeding those limits only in the case of Magnolia 
(from Manchester) and one or two more remarkable plants. 
We know of no other Flora of the kind which has been prepared 
so quickly and so well. The characters are short diagnoses, 
and in good part compiled. But the descriptive matter 
must have been original ; and it shows that aptitude for seizing 
the best points of character or most available distinctions, 
and of indicating them in few and clear words, which has 
made this Manual so deservedly popular. Similar merits 
distinguish, on its botanical side, Dr. Bigelow's " American 
Medical Botany," a quarto work which was published, in three 
parts or volumes, between 1817 and 1821, with colored plates 
— at that time thought to be very good ones indeed — of the 
principal medicinal plants of the country. He also brought 
out an American edition of Sir James Edward Smith's " Introduction 
to Botany " ; and his botanical knowledge, along with 
that of the Materia Medica generally and his classical scholarship, 
placed him at the head, or at the laboring oar, of the 
committee which in 1820 formed the American Pharmacopoeia. 
The writer used this volume in his medical student days, and 
remembers dimly how the account of minor preparations, coming 
down to jams and conserves, ended with the classical 
" Jam satis est mihi." 
The second edition of the " Florula Bostoniensis," published 
in 1824, while retaining its modest title, was nearly doubled 
in size and in the number of plants it contained, the whole 
area of New England included ; and it became the manual of 
botany for the region. What a popular and satisfactory work 
it was, especially to hundreds of amateur botanists, some still 
living may testify. 
The third and last edition, issued in 1840, was a reprint 
with various additions and corrections, furnished mainly from 
those who had learned their botany from the preceding one. 
This is the last Flora or Manual of this and perhaps any 
other country, arranged upon the Linnaean artificial system. 
Much later in life the author contemplated a revision of the 
work, brought up to the time and illustrated by chromohthographic 
plates, such as we have lately seen turned to good 
account. But after some consideration the project was abandoned. 
He did not propose himself to undertake the editorial 
work ; for he had long since passed from actual service into 
the emeritus or honorary rank of botanists; and his active 
Professional life, already verging to its close, was diversified 
or relieved by other avocations. Indeed, some of these were 
taken up very early. Fie became Rumford professor of the 
applications at Cambridge in 1816, and delivered annual 
courses of lectures until 1827, when he published the substance 
of them in a volume entitled " Elements of Technology," 
here coining this apt word. During all this time, and 
much longer, he was professor of Materia Medica in the medical 
school of Harvard University, namely from 1815 to 1855 ; 
for many of these years one of the physicians of the Massachusetts 
General Hospital; through all of them, and until old 
age disabled him, a leading physician of Boston. From the 
year 1847 to 1863 he was president of the American Academy 
°i Arts and Sciences, of which body he was a member for 
sixty-seven years ! 
We cannot here refer to Dr. Bigelow's various professional 
and literary writings. They are not numerous, but are weighty. 
His treatise on " Nature in Disease," which contains the famous 
discourse " On Self-limited Disease," is the most important 
of them ; and an address "On the Limits of Education," 
delivered in the year 1865 before the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, is notable. It has been said of the latter, that 
never before was the depreciation of classical study or o-eneral 
culture, as a preparation for technical scientific education, 
undertaken by so ripe a classical scholar or so wide-cultured 
a man. His many essays in English and Latin verse, some of 
which have been privately printed, ought to be collected. Dr. 
Bigelow lived, honored and trusted, to a good old age before 
infirmities touched his frame, and only toward the close was 
the brightness of his acute mind dimmed. The candle at 
length burnt down, the flame flickered awhile in the socket, 
and the light went out. 
The name will abide in botanical nomenclature. First appeared 
in Rees' Cyclopedia the Bigelowia of Smith, founded 
on the Adelia of Michaux. But that is Forestiera. Then 
Sprengel, in 1821, founded a genus Bigelovia on a Brazilian 
plant which he took to be a Rhamnacea, but it is a species of 
Casearia. Again, in 1824, Sprengel gave the name to a part 
of Spermacoce, the Borreria of G. Meyer. Then De Candolle, 
in 1824, was proposing a Bigelowia on Solea concolor, 
of our own New England, as the " Prodromus " records, when 
he found he had to refer it to Noisettia. Lastly, in 1836, De 
Candolle bestowed the name of Bigelovia upon some goldenflowered 
Compositce of the southern United States, which had 
borne the name of an Old World genus, Chrysocoma (Anglice, 
Golden-tuft), and he added the complimentary phrase : "A 
Chrysocoma separatum dicavi cl. J. Bigelow qui florae Americanse 
auream coronam flora Bostoniensi et medica addidit." 
Although this genus was founded upon only two or three 
species, it has been vastly extended by the exploration of the 
western regions of our country, where it forms a conspicuous 
and characteristic portion of the low shrubby vegetation. 
More than thirty North American species of Biglovia, besides 
one of Mexico and two of the Andes of South America, now 
commemorate our venerable late associate. Most of them 
were introduced to the genus by the present writer. 
JOHN CAREY. 
John Carey — of whom few of the botanists of our day 
can have a personal remembrance — died at Blackheath, near 
London, March 26 ult., in the 83d year of his age. He came 
from London to the United States, in the spring of 1830, accompanied 
by three young and motherless children and by his 
brother, Samuel T. Carey, who was also addicted to botany. 
Both, we believe, were Fellows of the Linnaean Society, and 
were near friends of Thomas Bell, afterwards the president 
of that society, who also lived to a good old age, dying 
only a few weeks earlier than the subject of this notice. 
Samuel T. Carey remained in the city of New York, in active 
business, and so was only an amateur botanist. His brother 
John went into the country, first to Towanda, in the northern 
part of Pennsylvania, then to Bellows Falls, Vermont, where, 
giving much of his leisure to botanical pursuits, he resided 
until the year 1836, when he removed to New York, upon the 
entrance of his sons into Columbia College. He did not 
enter into business, but his administrative talents and great 
worth were so appreciated that he was at various times called 
to very responsible temporary positions. These positions, 
although unsought, were not unwelcome, for no small part of 
the moderate property he had brought from England had 
been lost in investments made through reliance upon the 
honor and probity of defaulting States. 
1 rom the time of his arrival in the United States down to 
the year of his return to England in 1852, most of his leisure 
Was given to botany, and much of it in the companionship of 
the present writer, who was generously and greatly assisted 
by him in many critical studies. The proofs of the writer's 
first botanical book were revised by him, and to the first 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xix. 421. (1880.) 
edition of the " Manual of Botany " Mr. Carey contributed 
the articles on Salix and on Carex, at that time the two most 
difficult parts of the work. In the year 1841 the two made a 
botanical journey together into the mountains of North Carolina, 
extending to the Grandfather and to the Roan, though a 
mishap upon the former mountain prevented Mr. Carey from 
reaching the latter. After the establishment of the writer at 
Cambridge, Mr. Carey was his frequent guest and invaluable 
companion. His botanical career may have said to have 
closed in the year 1852. In that year he returned to England 
alone, having successively lost his aged mother and his 
two younger sons, and seen the elder son happily established 
in marriage. Fie engaged for several years in business, in 
connection with a friend of his youth, whose daughter he soon 
married, but lost within three years, after the birth of the second 
of the two children, the solace and comfort and care of a 
serene old age, who survive to perpetuate his name, we trust, 
on that side of the ocean also. Mr. Carey's first herbarium 
was destroyed by a calamitous fire in New York, at the time 
of the death of his youngest son. American botanists vied 
with each other in the endeavor to repair this serious loss, and 
another large collection of United States plants was formed, 
critically studied, and carefully annotated. This was presented 
to the Kew Gardens herbarium eleven years ago. 
Several species of United States plants commemorate this 
honored name, among them a Saxifrage, which was discovered 
upon the excursion to the mountains of North Carolina, where 
the survivor of the party re-collected it last summer. The 
almost sole survivor of a botanical circle, of which Torrey was 
the centre, sadly but serenely pays the tribute of this brief 
note to the memory of a near and faithful friend, an accomplished 
botanist, a genial and warm-hearted and truly good 
man. 
THOMAS POTTS JAMES. 
Thomas Potts James died at his residence in Cambridge, 
February 22, 1882, in the seventy-ninth year of his 
age. He had been a Fellow of the Academy for only four 
years, most of his life having been spent in Philadelphia, in 
the neighborhood of which city he was born on the Ist of 
September, 1803. His paternal and maternal ancestors were 
notable persons among the earlier settlers of Pennsylvania. 
For forty years he was engaged in business in Philadelphia 
as a wholesale druggist, on the relinquishment of which he 
removed to Cambridge, bringing his wife and their four children 
to her paternal home. From his youth he was more or 
less devoted to botany ; but of late years, having more leisure 
for the indulgence of his taste, and wishing to be more than 
an amateur, he devoted himself exclusively and most sedulously 
to bryology, in which he became a proficient. After 
the death of Mr. Sullivant in 1873, Mr. James and our associate, 
Lesquereux, were looked to as the principal authorities 
upon Mosses in this country ; and the duty appropriately devolved 
upon them of preparing the systematic work upon 
North American Bryology which Mr. Sullivant had planned. 
Owing to the preoccupation of Mr. Lesquereux in vegetable 
palaeontology, the laboring oar fell to Mr. James. He had 
already published some papers upon the subject in the " Transactions 
of the American Philosophical Society," of which he 
had long been an active member, and he had contributed to 
Mr. Watson's "Botany of Clarence King's Exploration on the 
Fortieth Parallel" a notable article on the Mosses of that 
survey. Our own Academy has also published some of the 
results of the joint study of these two veteran bryologists. 
The characters of Mosses in these days are mostly drawn 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, xvii. 405. 
(1882.) 
from their minute structure. Hundreds of species and varieties 
in numerous specimens had to be patiently scrutinized 
under the compound microscope, the details sketched and collated, 
and the differences weighed. To this task Mr. James 
wave himself with single and untiring devotion. He had nearly 
brought this protracted labor of microscopical analysis to a 
conclusion, and was actually engaged in this work, when the 
eye suddenly was dimmed and the pencil dropped from his 
hand. Partial paralysis was soon followed by coma, and he 
died within a few hours. So very much has been done, that it 
is confidently hoped that his coadjutor may soon bring the work 
to a completion, and give to bryological students the Manual 
of North American Mosses which is greatly needed, and to 
which a vast amount of faithful research has been devoted. 
The name of Mr. James will thereby be inseparably associated 
with the advancement of an interesting branch of botany. 
He was not often seen at our meetings, but he is greatly 
missed by his associates in study, and his memory is cherished 
by all who in the various relations of life came to know this 
diligent and conscientious student of nature, and most estimable, 
simple-hearted, kindly, and devout man. 
JOHN AMORY LOWELL. 
John Amory Lowell died at his residence in Boston, on 
the 31st of October last, when he had almost completed the 
eighty-third year of his age, for he was born on the 11th of 
November, 1798. A few years of his boyhood— from 1803 
to 1806 — were passed in Paris, where he was a spectator of 
some of the glorifications of the First Empire, especially on 
the occasion of the return from Austerlitz. He entered Harvard 
College in 1811, Messrs. Sparks, Parsons, and Palfrey 
being among his classmates, and after graduation he entered 
a mercantile house. He was elected into this Academy on the 
10th of November, 1841, at the same time with two other 
Fellows assigned to the botanical section. One was William 
Oakes, of Ipswich, who died seven years afterward ; to the 
other is assigned the duty of preparing this memorial. When 
the Fellows of the Academy were arranged in classes and sections, 
the pronounced tastes inherited from his father and cultivated 
by his own studies made it natural that he should belong 
to the small section of botany. But he might with equal propriety 
have been relegated to more than one section of the 
third class. For, notwithstanding his devotion to business 
affairs, his classical and linguistic knowledge were always 
well kept up, and his authority upon economical and financial 
questions was great. 
The family has always had a marked representation in this 
Academy. To mention only the direct line, the subject of 
our notice was chosen into it very shortly after the death of 
his father, — the John Lowell who, after achieving distinction 
and a competency at the bar, retired from active practice at 
the age of thirty-four, to be known through bis valuable writings 
as " The Norfolk Farmer," and as a principal promoter, 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, xvii. 408. 
(1882.) 
if not the founder, of scientific agriculture and horticulture in 
New England. John Lowell — the father of John Amory 
Lowell — was elected into the Academy in the year 1804, 
soon after the decease of his father, the Hon. John Lowell, 
first judge of the United States District Court of Massachusetts, 
under a commission from Washington. This office is 
now held by his great-grandson, the eldest son of our deceased 
associate, who has been a Fellow since the year 1877, thus 
continuing the line from the very foundation of the Academy, 
for Judge Lowell was one of the sixty-two members incorporated 
by the charter in 1780. In tracing the genealogy one 
step farther back, we come (as is almost universal in New 
England families of note) upon a clergyman, the Rev. John 
Lowell, of Newbury, a man of mark in his day. 
Mr. Lowell was the fourth of his family to be a member of 
the Corporation of Harvard University, to which he gave a 
continuous and most valuable service of forty years. He was 
for more than fifty years one of the directors of the Suffolk 
Bank, which was chartered in his time, and which early established 
a very useful plan for the redemption of the currency 
of the New England banks in Boston. Not to mention other 
important public trusts, — as of the Athenaeum, of the Massachusetts 
General Hospital, of the Agricultural Trustees, of 
the Provident Institution for Savings, to all of which he rendered 
assiduous and wise service, — nor to refer here to the 
very important part which he has taken for a lifetime in the 
development of the manufacturing interests of Massachusetts, 
especially as prosecuted in the town which was named in commemoration 
of similar services by his cousin, — we proceed to 
speak of that most important " corporation sole " founded by 
that cousin, the Lowell Institute. This trust was specifically 
consigned to our late associate and to such successor as he 
should appoint, — with preference to the family and the name 
of Lowell, — subject to no other than a formal visitatorial 
control, mainly for auditorship. And "to him, single and 
alone, it fell to shape the whole policy and take the whole 
direction of this great educational foundation," the history of 
which for almost half a century has justly been said to be a 
" record of his own intellectual breadth and scope, as well as 
of his large administrative capacity." We all know with what 
good judgment, with what liberality, and with what success 
this peculiar trust has been administered, and how on the one 
hand a series of most distinguished men have been attracted 
into its service, while on the other the efforts of younger men 
have been stimulated and rewarded at the period when such 
encouragement was most important to them. Suffice it to 
mention the names of Lyell and Agassiz, — the former early 
and also a second time brought from England for courses of 
lectures at the Lowell Institute, the latter a permanent acquisition 
to us and to our country. Through Mr. Lowell's 
discernment, moreover, the first encouragement to devote his 
life to scientific pursuits was afforded to Jeffries Wyman, by 
the offer of the curatorship of the Institute as well as of a 
lectureship. The intellectual and the financial interests of 
this trust have equally prospered in Mr. Lowell's hands ; for 
while the number of lecture-courses has been doubled, and 
various subsidiary lines of instruction have been developed, 
the principal of the fund has been increased to thrice its 
original amount. 
o , - - 
Mr. Lowell's fondness for botany developed shortly after he 
left college, and was incited by the botanical intercourse between 
his father and the late Dr. Francis Boott, with whom 
he maintained a lifelong friendship. But it was only in about 
the year 1844 or 1845 that he began the formation of an 
herbarium and botanical library ; and this was actively prosecuted 
for several years, in evident expectation of comparative 
leisure which he could devote to scientific studies. He subscribed 
liberally to the botanical explorations in our newlyacquired 
or newly-opened western territories ; and when in 
Europe, in 1850 and 1851, he added largely to his store of 
rare and costly botanical books. But just when he was ready 
to use the choice materials and appliances which had been 
brought together, the financial crisis of 1857 remanded him to 
business. The grave duties and responsibilities which he resumed 
he carried up nearly to the age of fourscore — carried 
as it were with the vigor of early manhood and the cheerful 
ease that attends " a real love of work for the work's own 
sake." And when it became evident that the comparatively 
unbroken attention requisite for serious botanical study was 
not to be secured, and as soon as a building was prepared for 
their reception, he presented all his botanical books which 
were needed to the herbarium of Harvard University ; and 
the remainder, with his herbarium, to the Boston Society of 
Natural History, — not giving up the while his studious habits, 
but transferring his attention back to the Latin and the 
French classics, and in a certain degree to German and Italian 
literature. 
As his father was one of the leading promoters of the establishment 
of the Botanic Garden of Harvard University, Mr. 
Lowell was also its most efficient supporter through its years 
of sorest need ; and, in memory of his father, he bequeathed 
to it the sum of $20,000 in order to make his annual subvention 
perpetual. He made a legacy of equal amount to the 
general Library of the University, which he along with his 
father and grandfather had served in a most responsible trust 
for seventy years. He never sought or accepted any office in 
city or state ; but few men were more sought for responsible 
trusts, o v ever served their day and generation more devotedly, 
disinterestedly, and wisely. He seemed always to have a firm 
confidence in his own judgment, and that confidence appears 
not to have been misplaced. 
CHARLES DARWIN. 
Charles Darwin died on the 19th of April last, a few 
months after the completion of his seventy-third year ; and on 
the 26th, the mortal remains of the most celebrated man of 
science of the nineteenth century were laid in Westminster 
Abbey, near to those of Newton. 
He was born at Shrewsbury, February 12, 1809, and was 
named Charles Robert Darwin. But the middle appellation 
was omitted from his ordinary signature and from the titlepages 
of the volumes which, within the last twenty-five years, 
have given such great renown to an already distinguished 
name. His grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin, — who died 
seven years before his distinguished grandson was born, — 
was one of the most notable and original men of his age ; and 
his father, also a physician, was a person of very marked 
character and ability. His maternal grandfather was Josiah 
Wedgwood, who, beginning as an artisan potter, produced 
the celebrated Wedgwood ware, and became a Fellow of the 
Royal Society and a man of much scientific mark. The importance 
of heritability, which is an essential part of Darwinism, 
would seem to have had a significant illustration in 
the person of its great expounder. He was educated at the 
Shrewsbury Grammar School and at Edinburgh University, 
where, following the example of his grandfather, he studied 
for two sessions, having the medical profession in view, and 
where, at the close of the year 1826, he made his first contribution 
to natural history in two papers (one of them on the 
ova of Flustra). Soon finding the medical profession not to 
his liking, he proceeded to the University of Cambridge, 
entering Christ's College, and took his bachelor's degree in 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Science, xvii. 449. 
(1882.) , 
1831 ; that of M. A. in 1837, after his return from South 
America. 
It is said that Darwin was a keen fox-hunter in his youth, 
— • not a bad pursuit for the cultivation of the observing powers. 
There is good authority for the statement — though it 
has nowhere been made in print — that at Cambridge he was 
disposed at one time to make the Church his profession, following 
the example of Buckland and of his teacher, Sedgwick. 
But in 1831, just as he was taking his bachelor's degree, 
Captain Fitzroy offered to receive into his own cabin 
any naturalist who was disposed to accompany him in the 
Beagle's surveying voyage round the world. Mr. Darwin 
volunteered his services without salary, with the condition 
only that he should have the disposal of his own collections. 
And this expedition of nearly five years — from the latter 
part of September, 1831, to the close of October, 1836 — not 
only fixed the course and character of the young naturalist's 
life-work, but opened to his mind its principal problems and 
suggested the now familiar solution of them. For he brought 
back with him to England a conviction that the existing species 
of animals and plants are the modified descendants of 
earlier forms, and that the internecine struggle for life in 
which these modifiable forms must have been engaged would 
scientifically explain the changes. The noteworthy point is 
that both the conclusion and the explanation were the legitimate 
outcome of real scientific investigation. It is an equally 
noteworthy fact, and a characteristic of Darwin's mind, that 
these pregnant ideas were elaborated for more than twenty 
years before he gave them to the world. Offering fruit so 
well ripened upon the bough, commending the conclusions he 
had so thoroughly matured by the presentation of very various 
lines of facts, and of reasonings close to the facts, unmixed 
with figments and a priori conceptions, it is not so surprising 
that his own convictions should at the close of the next twenty 
years be generally shared by scientific men. It is certainly 
gratifying that he should have lived to see it, and also have 
outlived most of the obloquy and dread which the promulgation 
of these opinions aroused. 
Mr. Darwin lived a very quiet and uneventful life. In 
1839 he married his cousin, Emma Wedgwood, who with five 
sons and two daughters survives him ; he made his home on 
the border of the little hamlet of Down, in Kent, — "a plain 
but comfortable brick house in a few acres of pleasure-ground, 
a pleasantly old-fashioned air about it, with a sense of peace 
and silence ; " and here, attended by every blessing except 
that of vigorous health, he lived the secluded but busy life 
which best suited his chosen pursuits and the simplicity of 
his character. He was seldom seen even at scientific meetings, 
and never in general society ; but he could welcome his 
friends and fellow-workers to his own house, where he was the 
most charming of hosts. 
At his home, without distraction and as continuously as his 
bodily powers would permit, Mr. Darwin gave himself to his 
work. At least ten of his scientific papers, of greater or less 
extent, had appeared in the three years between his return to 
England and his marriage ; and in the latter year (1839) he 
published the book by which he became popularly known, 
namely, the " Journal of Researches into the Natural History 
and Geology of the Countries visited during the Voyage of 
the Beagle," which has been pronounced " the most entertaining 
book of genuine travels ever written," and it certainly is 
one of the most instructive. His work on " Coral Reefs " 
appeared in 1842, but the substance had been communicated 
to the Geological Society soon after his return to England ; 
his papers on " Volcanic Islands," on the " Distribution of 
Erratic Boulders and Contemporaneous Unstratified Deposits 
in South America," on the " Fine Dust which falls on Vessels 
in the Atlantic Ocean," and some other geological as well 
as zoological researches, were published previously to 1851. 
Between that year and 1855 he brought out his most considerable 
contributions to systematic zoology, his monographs 
on the Cirripedia and the fossil Lepadidae. 
We come to the first publication of what is now known as 
Darwinism. It consists of a sketch of the doctrine of Natural 
Selection, which was drawn up in the year 1839, and 
copied and communicated to Messrs. Lyell and Hooker in 
1844, being a part of the manuscript of a chapter in his 
" Origin of Species ; " also of a private letter addressed to 
the writer of this memorial in October, 1857, — the publication 
of which (in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Linnaean 
Society, Zoological Part, iii. 45-53, issued in the summer 
of 1858) was caused by the reception by Darwin himself 
of a letter from Mr. Wallace, inclosing a brief and strikingly 
similar essay on the same subject, entitled " On the Tendency 
of Varieties to depart indefinitely from the Original Type." 
Mr. Darwin's action upon the reception of this rival essay 
was characteristic. His own work was not yet ready, and the 
fact that it had been for years in preparation was known only 
to the persons above mentioned. He proposed to have the 
paper of Mr. Wallace (who was then in the Moluccas) published 
at once, in anticipation of his own leisurely prepared 
volume ; and it was only under the solicitation of his friends 
cognizant of the case that his own early sketch and the corroboratory 
letter were printed along with it. 
The precursory essays of Darwin and Wallace, published 
in the Proceedings of a scientific society, can hardly have been 
read except by a narrow circle of naturalists. Most thoughtful 
investigating naturalists were then in a measure prepared 
for them. But toward the close of the following year (in the 
autumn of 1859) appeared the volume " On the Origin of 
Species by means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of 
Favored Races in the Struggle for Life," the first and most 
notable of that series of duodecimos which have been read 
and discussed in almost every cultured language, and which 
within the lifetime of their author have changed the face and 
in some respect the character of natural history, — indeed 
have almost as deeply affected many other lines of investigation 
and thought. 
In this Academy, where the rise and progress of Darwinian 
evolution have been attentively marked and its bearings critically 
discussed, and at this date, when the derivative origin of 
animal and vegetable species is the accepted belief of all of us 
who study them, it would be superfluous to give any explanatory 
account of these now familiar writings ; nor, indeed, 
would the pages which we are accustomed to consecrate to the 
memory of our recently deceased associates allow of it. Let 
us note in passing that the succeeding volumes of the series may 
be ranked in two classes, one of which is much more widely 
known than the other. One class is of those which follow up 
the argument for the origination of species through descent 
with modification, or which widen its base and illustrate the 
modus operandi of Natural Selection. Such are the two volumes 
on " Domesticated Animals and Cultivated Plants," 
illustrating Variatior, Inheritance, Reversion, Interbreeding, 
etc. ; the volume on the " Descent of Man, and Selection in 
Relation to Sex," — which extended the hypothesis to its logical 
limits — and that, " On the Expression of the Emotions in 
Man and the Lower Aniinals," published in 1872, which may 
be regarded as the last of this series. Since then Mr. Darwin 
appears to have turned from the highest to the lower 
forms of life, and to have entered upon the laborious cultivation 
of new and special fields of investigation, which, although 
prosecuted on the lines of his doctrine and vivified hj its 
ideas, might seem to be only incidentally connected with the 
general argument. But it will be found that all these lines 
are convergent. Nor were these altogether new studies. The 
germ of the three volumes upon the Relation of Insects to 
Flowers and its far-reaching consequences, is a little paper, 
published in the year 1858, " On the Agency of Bees in the 
Fertilization of Pajiilionaceous Flowers, and on the Crossing 
of Kidney Beans ; " the first edition of the volume on " The 
various Contrivances by which Orchids are Fertilized by Insects 
" appeared in 1862, thus forming the second volume of 
the whole series ; and the two volumes " On the Effects of 
Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom," and 
" The different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the same Species," 
which, along with the new edition of " The Fertilization 
of Orchids," were all published in 1876 and 1877, 
originated in two or three remarkable papers contributed to 
the "Journal of the Linnaean Society" in 1862 and 1863, but 
are supplemented by additional and protracted experiments. 
The volume on " Insectivorous Plants," and the noteworthy 
conclusions in respect to the fundamental unity, and therefore 
common source, of vegetable and animal life, grew out of an 
observation which the author made in the summer of 1860, 
when he " was surprised by finding how large a number of 
insects were caught by the leaves of the common Sun-dew 
(Drosera rotundifolia) , on a heath in Sussex." Almost 
everybody had noticed this ; and one German botanist (Roth), 
just a hundred years ago, had observed and described the 
movement of the leaf in consequence of the capture. But 
nothing came of it, or of what had been as long known of our 
Dionaea, beyond a vague wonderment, until Mr. Darwin took 
up the subject for experimental investigation. The precursor 
of his volume on " The Movements and Habits of Climbing 
Plants," published in 1875, as well as of the recent and larger 
volume on " The Power of Movement in Plants," 1880, was 
an essay published in the " Journal of the Linnaean Society " 
in 1865 ; and this was instigated by an accidental but capital 
observation made by a correspondent, in whose hands it was 
sterile ; but it became wonderfully fertile when touched by 
Darwin's genius. 1 His latest volume, on " The Formation of 
Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms," is a development, 
after long years, of a paper which he read before the 
Geological Society of London in 1837. 
These subsidiary volumes are less widely known than those 
1 Mr. Darwin's quickness in divining the meaning of seemingly unimportant 
things is illustrated in his study of Dionaea. Noting that the 
trap upon irritation closes at first imperfectly, leaving some room within 
and a series of small interstices between the crossed spines, but after a 
time, if there is prey within, shuts down close, he at once inferred that 
this was a provision for allowing small insects to escape, and for retaining 
only those large enough to make the long process of digestion remunerative. 
To test the surmise, he asked a correspondent to visit the habitat 
of Dionsea at the proper season, and to ascertain by the examination of a 
large number of the traps in action whether any below a certain considerable 
size were to be found in them. The result confirmed the inference, 
a comparatively trivial but characteristic illustration of Darwin's confidence 
in the principle of utility, and a good example of the truth of the 
dictum, which was by some thought odd when first made, namely, that 
Darwin had restored teleology to natural history, from which the study 
of morphology had dissevered it. 
of the other class ; but they are of no less interest, and they 
are very characteristic of the author's genius and methods, — 
characteristic also of his laboriousness. For the amount of 
prolonged observation, watchful care, and tedious experiment 
they have demanded is as remarkable as the skill in devising 
simple and effectual modes of investigation is admirable. 
That he should have had the courage to undertake and the 
patience to carry on new inquiries of this kind after he had 
reached his threescore and ten years of age, and after he had 
attained an unparalleled breadth of influence and wealth of 
fame, speaks much for his energy and for his devotion to 
knowledge for its own sake. Indeed, having directed the 
flow of scientific thought into the new channel he had opened, 
along which the current set quicker and stronger than he could 
have expected, he seems to have taken up with fresh delight 
studies which he had marked out in early years, or topics 
which from time to time had struck his acute attention. To 
these he gave himself, quite to the last, with all the spirit and 
curiosity of youth. Evidently all this amount of work was 
done for the pure love of it ; it was all done methodically, 
with clear and definite aim, without haste, but without intermission. 

It would confidently be supposed that in this case genius 
and industry were seconded by leisure and bodily vigor. Fortunately 
Darwin's means enabled him to control the disposition 
of his time. But the voyage of the Beagle, which was 
so advantageous to science, ruined his health. A sort of 
chronic sea-sickness, under which all his work abroad was 
performed, harassed him ever afterwards. The days in which 
he could give two hours to investigation or writing were 
counted as good ones, and for much of his life they were 
largely outnumbered by those in which nothing could be 
attempted. Only by great care and the simplest habits was 
he able to secure even a moderate amount of comfortable 
existence. But in this respect his later years were the best 
ones, and therefore the busiest. In them also he had most 
valuable filial aid. There was nothing to cause much anxiety 
until his seventy-third birthday had passed, or to excite alarm 
until the week before his death. 
It may without exaggeration be said that no scientific man, 
certainly no naturalist, ever made an impression at once so 
deep, so wide, and so immediate. The name of Linnaeus 
might suggest comparison; but readers and pupils of Linnaeus 
over a century ago were to those of Darwin as tens are to 
thousands, and the scientific as well as the popular interest of 
the subjects considered were somewhat in the same ratio. 
Humboldt, who, like Darwin, began with research in travel, 
and to whom the longest of lives, vigorous health, and the 
best opportunities were allotted, essayed similar themes in a 
more ambitious spirit, enjoyed equal or greater renown, but 
made no deep impression upon the thought of his own day or 
of ours. As one criterion of celebrity, it may be noted that 
no other author we know of ever gave rise in his own active 
lifetime to a special department of bibliography. Dante-literature 
and Shakespeare-literature are the growth of centuries ; 
but Darwinismus had filled shelves and alcoves and teeming 
catalogues while the unremitting author was still supplying 
new and ever novel subjects for comment. The technical 
term which he chose for a designation of his theory, and several 
of the phrases originated in explanation of it only twentyfive 
years ago, have already been engrafted into his mother 
tongue, and even into other languages, and are turned to use 
in common as well as in philosophical discourse, without sense 
of strangeness. 
Wonderful indeed is the difference between the reception 
accorded to Darwin and that met with by his predecessor, 
Lamarck. But a good deal has happened since Lamarck's 
day ; wide fields of evidence were open to Darwin which were 
wholly unknown to his forerunner ; and the time had come 
when the subject of the origin and connection of living forms 
could be taken up as a research rather than as a speculation. 
Philosophizers on evolution have not been rare ; but Darwin 
was not one of them. Fie was a scientific investigator, — a 
philosopher, if you please, but one of the type of Galileo. 
Indeed very much what Galileo was to physical science in his 
time, Darwin is to biological science in ours. This without 
reference to the fact that the writings of both conflicted with 
similar prepossessions ; and that the Darwinian theory, legitimately 
considered, bids fair to be placed in this respect upon 
the same footing with the Copernican system. 
An English poet wrote that he awoke one morning and 
found himself famous. When this happened to Darwin, it 
was a genuine surprise. Although he had addressed himself 
simply to scientific men, and had no thought of arguing his 
case before a popular tribunal, yet " The Origin of Species " 
was too readable a book upon too sensitive a topic to escape 
general perusal ; and this, indeed, must in some sort have 
been anticipated. But the avidity with which the volume was 
taken up, and the eagerness of popular discussion which ensued, 
were viewed by the author — as his letters at the time 
testify — with a sense of amused wonder at an unexpected 
and probably transient notoriety. 
The theory he had developed was presented by a working 
naturalist to his fellows, with confident belief that it would 
sooner or later win acceptance from the younger and more 
observant of these. The reason why these moderate expectations 
were much and so soon exceeded are not far to seek, 
though they were not then obvious to the world in general. 
Although mere speculations were mostly discountenanced by 
the investigating naturalists of that day, yet their work and 
their thoughts were, consciously or unconsciously, tending in 
the direction of evolution. Even those who manfully rowed 
against the current were more or less carried along with it, 
and some of them unwittingly contributed to its force. Most 
of them in their practical studies had worked up to, or were 
nearly approaching, the question of the relation of the past 
inhabitants of the earth to the present, and of the present to 
one another, in such wise as to suggest inevitably that, somehow 
or other, descent with modification was eventually to be 
the explanation. This was the natural outcome of the line of 
thought of which Lyell early became the cautious and fairminded 
expositor, and with which he reconstructed theoretical 
geology. If Lyell had known as much at first hand of botany 
or zoology as he knew of geology, it is probable that his celebrated 
chapter on the permanence of species in the " Prin- 
ciples" would have been reconsidered before the work had 
passed to the ninth edition in 1853. Fie was convinced that 
species went out of existence one by one, through natural 
causes, and that they came in one by one, bearing the impress 
of their immediate predecessors ; but he saw no way to connect 
the two through natural operations. Nor, in fact, had 
any of the evolutionists been able to assign real causes capable 
of leading on such variations as are of well-known occurrence 
to wider and specific or generic differences. Just here came 
Darwin. When upon the spot he had perceived that the 
animals of the Galapagos must be modified forms derived 
from the adjacent continent, and he soon after worked out 
the doctrine of natural selection. This supplied what was 
wanting for the condensation of opinions and beliefs, and the 
collocation of rapidly accumulating facts, into a consistent 
and workable scientific theory, under a principle which unquestionably 
could directly explain much, and might indirectly 
explain more. 
It is not merely that Darwin originated and applied a new 
principle. Not to speak of Wallace, his contemporary, who 
came to it later, his countryman, Dr. Wells, as Mr. Darwin 
points out, " distinctly recognizes the principle of natural 
selection, and this is the first recognition which has been 
indicated ; but he applied it only to the races of men, and to 
certain characters alone." Darwin, like the rest of the world, 
was unaware of this anticipation until he was preparing the 
fourth edition of his " Origin of Species," in 1866, when he 
promptly called attention to it, perhaps magnifying its importance. 
However this be, Darwin appears to have been first 
and alone in apprehending and working out the results which 
necessarily come from the interaction of the surrounding 
agencies and conditions under which plants and animals exist, 
including, of course, their action upon each other. Personifying 
the ensemble of these and the consequences, — namely, 
the survival only of the fittest in the struggle for life, — under 
the term of Natural Selection, Mr. Darwin, with the instinct 
of genius divined, and with the ability of a master worked 
out its pregnant and far-reaching applications. He not only 
saw its strong points, but he foresaw its limitations, indicated 
most of the objections in advance of his opponents, weighed 
them with judicial mind, and where he could not obviate 
them, seemed never disposed to underrate their force. Although 
naturally disposed to make the most of his theory, he 
distinguished between what he could refer to known causes 
and what thus far is not referable to them. Consequently, 
he kept clear of that common confusion of thought which 
supposes that natural selection originates the variations which 
it selects. He believed, and he has shown it to be probable, 
that external conditions induce the actions and changes in the 
living plant or animal which may lead on to the difference 
between one species and another ; but he did not maintain 
that they produced the changes, or were sufficient scientifically 
to explain them. Unlike most of his contemporaries in this 
respect, he appears to have been thoroughly penetrated by the 
idea that the whole physiological action of the plant or animal 
is a response of the living organism to the action of the surroundings. 

The judicial fairness and openness of Darwin's mind, his 
penetration and sagacity, his wonderful power of eliciting the 
meaning of things which had escaped questioning by their 
very commonness, and of discerning the great significance of 
causes and interactions which had been disregarded on account 
of their supposed insignificance, his method of reasoning 
close to the facts and in contact with the solid ground of 
nature, his aptness in devising fruitful and conclusive experiments, 
and in prosecuting nice researches with simple but 
effectual appliances, and the whole rare combination of qualities 
which made him facile princeps in biological investigation, 
— all these gifts are so conspicuously manifest in his 
published writings, and are so fully appreciated, that there is 
no need to celebrate them in an obituary memorial. The 
writings also display in no small degree the spirit of the man, 
and to this not a little of their persuasiveness is due. His 
desire to ascertain the truth, and to present it purely to his 
readers, is everywhere apparent. Conspicuous, also, is the 
absence of all trace of controversy and of everything like 
pretension ; and this is remarkable, considering how censure 
and how praise were heaped upon him without stint. He 
does not teach didactically, but takes the reader along with 
him as his companion in observation and in experiment. 
And in the same spirit, instead of showing pique to an opponent, 
he seems always to regard him as a helper in his search 
for the truth. Those privileged to know him well will certify 
that he was one of the most kindly and charming, unaffected, 
simple-hearted, and lovable of men. 
How far and how long the Darwinian theory will hold 
good, the future will determine. But in its essential elements, 
apart from a priori philosophizing, with which its author had 
nothing to do, it is an advance from which it is evidently impossible 
to recede. As has been said of the theory of the 
Conservation of Energy, so of this : " The proof of this great 
generalization, like that of all other generalizations, lies 
mainly in the fact that the evidence in its favor is continually 
augmenting, while that against it is continually diminishing, 
as the progress of science reveals to us more and more of the 
workings of the universe." 
JOSEPH DECAISNE. 
Joseph Decaisne, the oldest member of the Botanical 
Section on the foreign list, died at Paris, on the Bth of February 
last, in the seventy-fifth year of his age. He was 
elected into this Academy in August, 1846, along with Agassiz 
and De Verneuil. He was bom at Brussels, March 11, 
1807, the second of three brothers, one of whom became a 
distinguished painter, and the other the head of the medical 
department of the Belgian army. He came to Paris and 
entered the Jardin des Plantes when a lad of seventeen years, 
and in its service his whole subsequent life was passed. The 
young employe attracted the attention of Adrien de Jussieu, 
who, seeing his promise and unusual botanical knowledge, 
soon placed him at the head of the seed department, and in 
1833 made him his Aide-naturaliste, thus giving the young 
gardener opportunity for the studies and researches by which 
he won a place among the foremost botanists of the time. 
For more than forty years the administration of the Jardin 
des Plantes and the duties of the chair of Culture at the 
Museum were in his hands, he having supplied the place of 
Mirbel through the closing years of the latter's life, and succeeded 
him as professor in the year 1851 ; and these duties 
he continued to fulfill to the last. He was elected a member 
of the Institute in 1847, in succession to Dutrochet ; for forty 
years he was one of the editors of, and since the death of his 
colleague, Adolphe Brongniart, he was the sole editor of the 
botanical portion of the " Annales des Sciences Naturelles." 
In the Annales he had published some good botanical papers, 
the earliest in the year 1831. But his first distinction 
was gained by his anatomical and physiological researches 
upon the Madder-plant, a monograph containing the results 
of which appeared at Brussels in 1837, and was said to be 
" one of the most able memoirs that has ever been published 
on the physiological history of plants and their bearing on 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, xvii. 458. (1882.) 
practical cultivation and manufactures." Two years later, in 
connection with the chemist Pcligot, he published an investigation 
of the anatomical structure of the Sugar-beet. His 
classical memoir upon the structure and development of the 
Mistletoe appeared in 1840, and is of purely scientific interest. 
In the year 1841 he showed that the Corallines, which had 
been wrongly carried over to the animal kingdom with the 
Corals and their allies, were genuine Seaweeds, disguised by 
the incorporation of a great amount of lime into their tissues. 
And about this time, in connection with his friend and former 
pupil, Thuret, he discovered and illustrated the male organs 
of the Fuci, as well as the mode of impregnation and reproduction, 
thus initiating the investigations which in the hands 
of the late Thuret and others have revolutionized phycology. 
Leaving these researches for his associate to complete and 
publish, thenceforth Decaisne turned all his attention to 
phanerogamous botany, morphological and systematic. Two 
orders were elaborated by him for De Candolle's " Prodromus," 
Asclepiadacece and Plantaginacece, the former demanding 
much minute research ; he produced in 1868, in 
conjunction with Le Maout, that admirable text-book, the 
" Traite Generale de Botanique," profusely illustrated by his 
own facile pencil, which is well known in the original and in 
the English translation edited by Sir Joseph Hooker. But 
the works by which he will be most widely known, and which 
were connected especially with his directorship of the Jardin 
des Plantes, are that incomparable series of colored illustrations 
of fruits, together with descriptive text, known as " Le 
Jardin Fruitier du Museum," and his subsidiary investigations 
and publications upon the Pomacea? and their allies. 
These important publications began in the year 1858, and 
were completed only a year or two ago. 
Decaisne never married : he lived his simple and devoted 
life in the house on Rue Cuvier in the Jardin des Plantes, 
where he died, regretted and beloved, the last of the line of 
illustrious botanists — such as Mirbel, Adrien de Jussieu, 
Gaudichaud, and Adolphe Brongniart — who were associated 
in the administration of this institution thirty or forty years 
ago. 
GEORGE ENGELMANN. 
In the death of Dr. Engelmann, which took place on the 
4th of February last, the American Academy has lost one of 
its very few Associate Fellows in the Botanical Section, and 
the science one of its most eminent and venerable cultivators. 
He was born at Frankfort-on-the-Main, February 2, 1809, 
and had therefore just completed his seventy-fifth year. His 
father, a younger member of the family of Engelmanns who 
for several generations served as clergymen at Bacharach on 
the Rhine, was also educated for the ministry, and was a 
graduate of the university of Halle, but he devoted his life to 
education. Marrying the daughter of George Oswald May, a 
somewhat distinguished portrait-painter, they established at 
Frankfort, and carried on for a time with much success, a 
school for young ladies, such as are common in the United 
States, but were then a novelty in Germany. 
George Engelmann was the eldest of thirteen children 
born of this marriage, nine of whom survived to manhood. 
Assisted by a scholarship founded by " the Reformed Congregation 
of Frankfort," he went to the university of Heidelberg 
in the year 1827, where he had as fellow-students and companions 
Karl Schimper and Alexander Braun. With the 
latter he maintained an intimate friendship and correspondence, 
interrupted only by the death of Braun in 1877. The 
former, who manifested unusual genius as a philosophical 
naturalist, after laying the foundations of phyllotaxy, to be 
built upon by Braun and others, abandoned, through some 
singular infirmity of temper, an opening scientific career of 
the highest promise, upon which the three young friends, 
Agassiz, Braun, and Schimper, and in his turn Engelmann, 
had zealously entered. 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, xix. 516. 
(1884.) 
Embarrassed by some troubles growing out of a political 
demonstration by the students at Heidelberg, Engelmann in 
the autumn of 1828 went to the university of Berlin for two 
years ; and thence to Wiirzburg, where he took his degree of 
Doctor in Medicine in the summer of 1831. His inaugural 
dissertation, " De Antholysi Prodromus," which he published 
at Frankfort in 1832, testifies to his early predilection for 
botany, and to his truly scientific turn of mind. It is a morphological 
dissertation, founded chiefly on the study of monstrosities, 
illustrated by five plates filled with his own drawings. 
It was therefore quite in the line with the little treatise 
on the Metamorphosis of Plants, published forty years before 
by another and the most distinguished native of Frankfort, 
and it appeared so opportunely that it had the honor 
of Goethe's notice and approval. Goethe's correspondent, 
Madame von Willema, sent a copy to him only four weeks 
before his death. Goethe responded, making kind inquiries 
after young Engelmann, who, he said, had completely apprehended 
his ideas of vegetable morphology, and had shown 
such genius in their development that he offered to place in 
this young botanist's hands the store of unpublished notes and 
sketches which he had accumulated. 
The spring and summer of 1832 were passed at Paris in 
medical and scientific studies, with Braun and Agassiz as 
companions, leading, as he records, " a glorious life in scientific 
union, in spite of the cholera." Meanwhile, Dr. Engelmann's 
uncles had resolved to make some land investments in 
the valley of the Mississippi, and he willingly became their 
agent. At least one of the family was already settled in Illinois, 
not far from St. Louis. Dr. Engelmann, sailing from 
Bremen for Baltimore in September, joined his relatives in 
the course of the winter, made many lonely and somewhat 
adventurous journeys on horseback in southern Illinois, Missouri, 
and Arkansas, which yielded no other fruits than 
those of botanical exploration ; and finally he established 
himself in the practice of medicine at St. Louis, late in the 
autumn of 1835. St. Louis was then rather a frontier 
trading-post than a town, of barely eight or ten thousand 
inhabitants. He lived to see it become a metropolis of over 
four hundred thousand. Fie began in absolute poverty, the 
small means he had brought from Europe completely exhausted. 
In four years he had laid the foundations of success 
in his profession, and had earned the means for making a 
voyage to Germany, and, fulfilling a long-standing engagement, 
for bringing to a frugal home the chosen companion of 
his life, Dora Hartsmann, his cousin, whom he married at 
Kreuznach, on the 11th of June, 1840. On his way homeward, 
at New York, the writer of this memorial formed the personal 
acquaintance of Dr. Engelmann ; and thus began the friendship 
and the scientific association which has continued unbroken 
for almost half a century. 
Dr. Engelmaun's position as a leading physician in St. 
Louis, as well among the American as the German and French 
population, was now soon established. He was even able in 
1856, without risk, to leave his practice for two years, to devote 
most of the first summer to botanical investigation in 
Cambridge, and then, with his wife and young son, to revisit 
their native land, and to fill up a prolonged vacation in interesting 
travel and study. In the year 1868 the family visited 
Europe for a year, the son remaining to pursue his medical 
studies in Berlin. And lastly, his companion of nearly forty 
years having been removed by death in January, 1879, and 
his own robust health having suffered serious and indeed 
alarming deterioration, he sailed again for Germany in the 
summer of 1883. The voyage was so beneficial that he was 
able to take up some botanical investigations, which, however, 
were soon interrupted by serious symptoms. But the return 
voyage proved wonderfully restorative ; and when, in early 
autumn, he rejoined his friends here, they could hope that 
the unfinished scientific labors, which he at once resumed 
with alacrity of spirit, might still for a while be carried on 
with comfort. So indeed they were, in some measure, after 
his return to his home, yet with increasing infirmity and no 
little suffering until the sudden illness supervened which, in 
a few days, brought his honorable and well-filled life to 
a close. 
In the latter part of his life Dr. Engelmann was able to 
explore considerable portions of his adopted country, the 
mountains of North Carolina and Tennessee, the Lake Superior 
region, and the Rocky Mountains and contiguous plains 
in Colorado and adjacent territories, and so to study in place, 
and with the particularity which characterized his work, the 
Cacti, the Coniferm, and other groups of plants which he 
had for many years been specially investigating. "In 1880 
he made a long journey through the forests of the Pacific 
States, where he saw for the first time in the state of nature 
plants which he had studied and described more than thirty 
years before. Dr. Engelmann's associates [so one of them 
declares] will never forget his courage and industry, his enthusiasm 
and zeal, his abounding good-nature, and his kindness 
and consideration of every one with whom he came in 
contact." Flis associates, and also all his published writings, 
may testify to his acuteness in observation, his indomitable 
perseverance in investigation, his critical judgment, and a rare 
openness of mind which prompted him continually to revise 
old conclusions in the light of new facts or ideas. 
In the consideration of Dr. Engelmann's botanical work — 
to which these lines will naturally be devoted —it should be 
remembered that his life was that of an eminent and trusted 
physician, in large and general practice, who even in age and 
failing health was unable, however he would have chosen, to 
refuse professional services to those who claimed them ; that 
he devoted only the residual hours, which most men use for 
rest or recreation, to scientific pursuits, mainly to botany, yet 
not exclusively. He was much occupied with meteorology. 
On establishing his home at St. Louis, he began a series of 
thermometrical and barometrical observations, which he continued 
regularly and systematically to the last, when at home 
always taking the observations himself, — the indoor ones even 
up to the last day but one of his life. Even in the last week 
he was seen sweeping a path through the snow in his garden 
to reach his maximum and minimum thermometers. His 
latest publication (issued since his death by the St. Louis 
Academy of Sciences) is a digest and full representation of 
the thermometrical part of these observations for forty-seven 
years. He apologizes for not waiting the completion of the 
half-century before summing up the results, and shows that 
these could not after three more years be appreciably different. 

A list of Dr. Engelmann's botanical papers and notes, collected 
by his friend and associate, Professor Sargent, and 
published in Coulter's " Botanical Gazette " for May, 1884, 
contains about one hundred entries, and is certainly not 
quite complete. His earliest publication, his inaugural thesis 
already mentioned (De Antholysi Prodromus), is a treatise 
upon teratology in its relations to morphology. It is a remarkable 
production for the time and for a mere medical 
student with botanical predilections. There is an interesting 
recent analysis of it in " Nature " for April 24, by Dr. Masters, 
the leading teratologist of our day, who compares it with 
Moquin-Tandon's more elaborate " Teratologic Vegetale," 
published ten years afterwards, and who declares that, " when 
we compare the two works from a philosophical point of view, 
and consider that the one was a mere college essay, while the 
other was the work of a professed botanist, we must admit 
that Engelmann's treatise, so far as it goes, affords evidence 
of deeper insight into the nature and causes of the deviations 
from the ordinary conformation of plants than does that of 
Moquin." 
Transferred to the valley of the Mississippi and surrounded 
by plants most of which still needed critical examination, Dr. 
Engelmann's avocation in botany and his mode of work were 
marked out for him. Nothing escaped his attention; he drew 
with facility ; and he methodically secured his observations 
by notes and sketches, available for his own after-use and for 
that of his correspondents. But the lasting impression which 
he has made upon North American botany is due to his wise 
habit of studying his subjects in their systematic relations, 
and of devoting himself to a particular genus or group of 
plants (generally the more difficult) until he had elucidated 
it as completely as lay within his power. In this way all his 
work was made to tell effectively. 
Thus his first monograph was of the genus Cuscuta (published 
in the American Journal of Science, in 1842), of which 
when Engelmann took it up we were supposed to have only 
one indigenous species, and that not peculiar to the United 
States, but which he immediately brought up to fourteen 
species without going west of the Mississippi Valley. In the 
year 1859, after an investigation of the whole genus in the 
materials scattered through the principal herbaria of Europe 
and this country, he published in the first volume of the St. 
Louis Academy of Sciences a systematic arrangement of all 
the Cuscutce, characterizing seventy-seven species, besides 
others classed as perhaps varieties. 
Mentioning here only monographical subjects, we should 
next refer to his investigations of the Cactus family, upon 
which his work was most extensive and important, as well as 
particularly difficult, and upon which Dr. Engelmann's authority 
is of the very highest. Fie essentially for the first time 
established the arrangement of these plants upon floral and 
carpological characters. This formidable work was begun in 
his " Sketch of the Botany of Dr. A. Wislizenus's Expedition 
from Missouri to Northern Mexico," in the latter's memoir of 
this tour, published by the United States Senate. It was followed 
up by his account (in the American Journal of Science, 
1852) of the Giant Cactus on the Gila ( Cereus giganteus) 
and an allied species ; by his synopsis of the Cactacece of the 
United States, published in the "Proceedings of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences," 1856 ; and by his two illustrated 
memoirs upon the southern and western species, one 
contributed to the fourth volume of the series of Pacific Railroad 
Expedition Reports, the other to Emory's Report on the 
Mexican Boundary Survey. He had made large preparations 
for a greatly needed revision of at least the North American 
Cactacece. But, although his collections and sketches will be 
indispensable to the future monographer, very much knowledge 
of this difficult group of plants is lost by his death. 
Upon two other peculiarly American groups of plants, very 
difficult of elucidation in herbarium specimens, Yucca and 
Agave, Dr. Engelmann may be said to have brought his work 
up to the time. Nothing of importance is yet to be added to 
what he modestly styles " Notes on the Genus Yucca," published 
in the third volume of the Transactions of the St. Louis 
Academy, 1873, and not much to the "Notes on Agave," 
illustrated by photographs, included in the same volume and 
published in 1875. 
Less difficult as respects the material to work upon, but 
well adapted for his painstaking, precise, and thorough handling, 
were such genera as Juncus (elaborately monographed 
in the second volume of the Transactions of the St. Louis 
Academy, and also exemplified in distributed sets of specimens), 
Euphorbia (in the fourth volume of the Pacific Railroad 
Reports, and in the Botany of the Mexican Boundary), 
Sagittaria and its allies, Callitriche, Isoetes (of which his 
final revision is probably ready for publication), and the 
North American Loranthacece, to which Sparganium, certain 
groups of Gentiana, and some other genera, would have to 
be added in any complete enumeration. Revisions of these 
genera were also kindly contributed to Dr. Gray's Manual ; 
and he was an important collaborator in several of the memoirs 
of his surviving associate and friend. 
Of the highest interest, and among the best specimens of 
Dr. Engelmann's botanical work, are his various papers upon 
the American Oaks and the Coniferce, published in the 
" Transactions of the St. Louis Academy," and elsewhere, the 
results of long-continued and most conscientious study. The 
same must be said of his persevering study of the North American 
Vines, of which he at length recognized and characterized 
a dozen species, — excellent subjects for his nice discrimination, 
and now becoming of no small importance to grapegrowers, 
both in this country and in Europe. Nearly all that 
we know scientifically of our species and forms of Vitis is 
directly due to Dr. Engelmann's investigations. His first 
separate publication upon them, " The Grape Vines of Missouri," 
was published in 1860 ; his last, a reelaboration of 
the American species, with figures of their seeds, is in the 
third edition of the Bushberg Catalogue, published only a few 
months ago. 
Imperfect as this mere sketch of Dr. Engelmann's botanical 
authorship must needs be, it may show how much may be 
done for science in a busy physician's horce subsecivce, and in 
his occasional vacations. Not very many of those who could 
devote their whole time to botany have accomplished as much. 
It need not be said, and yet perhaps it should not pass unrecorded, 
that Dr. Engelmann was appreciated by his fellowbotanists 
both at home and abroad, that his name is upon the 
rolls of most of the societies devoted to the investigation of 
nature, that he was " everywhere the recognized authority in 
those departments of his favorite science which had most interested 
him," and that, personally one of the most affable 
and kindly of men, he was as much beloved as respected by 
those who knew him. 
More than fifty years ago his oldest associates in this country 
— one of them his survivor — dedicated to him a monotypical 
genus of plants, a native of the plains over whose borders 
the young immigrant on his arrival wandered solitary 
and disheartened. Since then the name of Engelmann has, 
by his own researches and authorship, become unalterably associated 
with the Buffalo-grass of the plains, the noblest Conifers 
of the Rocky Mountains, the most stately Cactus in the 
world and with most of the associated species, as well as with 
many other plants of which perhaps only the annals of botany 
may take account. It has been well said by a congenial biographer, 
that " the western plains will still be bright with the 
yellow rays of Engelmannia, and that the splendid Spruce, 
the fairest of them all, which bears the name of Engelmann, 
will still, it is to be hoped, cover with noble forests the highest 
slopes of the Rocky Mountains, recalling to men, as long 
as the study of trees occupies their thoughts, the memory of 
a pure, upright, and laborious life." 
OSWALD HEER. 
Oswald Heer, the most eminent investigator of the fossil 
plants and insects of the tertiary period, died on the 27th of 
September last, shortly after he had entered upon the seventyfifth 
year of his age. 
He was born at the hamlet of Nieder-Utzwyl, in Canton 
St. Gallen, Switzerland, August 31, 1809, passed most of 
his youth at Matt, in Canton Glarus, where his father was 
the parish clergyman, pursued his academic and professional 
studies at the university of Halle, and was ordained as minister 
of the Gospel in the year 1831. The next year he went 
to Zurich, where he resided for the rest of his life. Here he 
studied medicine for a time, but soon devoted himself seriously 
to entomology and botany, of which he was fond from 
boyhood. In 1834 he became Privat-docent of these sciences ; 
in 1852, when the university of Zurich was developed, he became 
its professor of botany, and in 1855 he took a similar 
chair in the Polytechnicum. Most of his earlier publications 
were entomological ; and it was by the way of entomology that 
he entered upon his distinguished career as a palaeontologist. 
His life-long friend, the eminent Escher von der Linth, appreciating 
his rare powers of observation, induced him to 
undertake the study of the fossil insects of the celebrated tertiary 
deposits of Oeningen. The results of his labors in this 
virgin field were published between the years 1847 and 1853. 
Flis attention had from the first been attracted to the plants 
associated with the insect remains. His first palaeo-botanical 
paper appeared in 1851 ; the three volumes of his " Flora 
Tertiaria Helvetiae " were issued between 1855 and 1859 ; in 
1862 his memoir on the fossil flora of Bovey-Tracey (Eno-- 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Science, xix. 556. 
(1884.) 
land) was published in the Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society, London. About the same time also appeared 
a paper in the Journal of the Geological Society on certain 
fossil plants of the Isle of Wight. For the benefit of his 
health, always delicate and then much impaired, he passed the 
winter of 1854-55 in Madeira, and on his return published a 
paper on the fossil plants of that island, and an article on the 
probable origin of the actual flora and fauna of the Azores, 
Madeira, and the Canaries. In this, and in his work, published 
in 1860, on " Tertiary Climates in their Relation to 
Vegetation " (which the next year appeared also in a French 
translation by his young friend Gaudin), Heer brought out 
his theory of a Miocene Atlantis. His more extensive and 
popular treatise upon past climates as illustrated by vegetable 
palaeontology, his " Urwelt der Schweiz," — a vivid portraiture 
of the past of his native country, — appeared in 1865, 
and afterwards in a revised French edition, with his friend 
Gaudin (who died soon after) for collaborator as well as 
translator. There was also an English translation by Heywood, 
published in 1876, and, indeed, it is said to have been 
translated into six languages. 
In 1877 Heer completed his " Flora Fossilis Helvetiae," a 
square-folio volume, with seventy plates, which extended and 
supplemented his Tertiary Flora of that country, being devoted 
to the illustration of the fossil plants of the Carboniferous, 
the Triassic, the Jurassic, and the Cretaceous, as well 
as the Eocene formations. 
The life-long delicacy of Heer's health prevented his making 
any extensive explorations in person. But materials for 
his investigation came to him in even embarrassing abundance, 
not only from his own country, — where, even before 
he was widely known (as his fellow-countryman and his distinguished 
fellow-worker in palseo-botany, Lesquereux, informs 
us), a lady opened upon her property near Lausanne quarries 
and tunnels expressly for the discovery and collection of fossil 
plants, and sent them by tons to Zurich, — but from all parts 
of the world collections were pressed upon him, and his whole 
time and strength were given to their study. In this way he 
became interested in the arctic fossil flora, of which he became 
the principal investigator and expounder. His first essay 
in the domain which he has made so peculiarly his own 
was in a paper on certain fossil plants of Vancouver's Island 
and British Columbia, published in 1865; and in 1868 he 
brought out the first of that most important series of memoirs 
upon the ancient floras of arctic America, Greenland, Spitzbergen, 
Nova Zembla, arctic and subarctic Asia, etc., which, 
collected, make up the seven quarto volumes of the " Flora 
Fossilis Arctica." The seventh volume of this monumental 
work was brought to a conclusion only a few months before 
the author's death. 
Fleer's researches into the fossil botany of the tertiary deposits 
were very important in their bearings. They made it 
certain that our actual temperate floras round the world had 
a common birthplace at the north, where the continents are 
in proximity ; they essentially identified the direct or collateral 
ancestors of our existing forest-trees which flourished 
within the arctic zone when it enjoyed a climate resembling 
our own at present ; and they leave the similarities and the 
dissimilarities of the temperate floras of the Old and the New 
World to be explained as simple consequences of established 
facts. Thus Heer himself did away with his own hypothesis 
of a continental Atlantis by bringing to light the facts which 
proved that there was no need of it. And while thus justifying 
the ideas which had been brought forward in one of the 
memoirs of the American Academy (in 1859) before these 
fossil data were known, he was not slow to adopt and to extend 
the tentative views which he had confirmed. 
A list of Heer's scientific publications is given in the " Botanisches 
Contralblatt," No. 5, for 1884. They are seventyseven 
in number, besides the seven quarto volumes of the 
" Flora Fossilis Arctica," which comprise a considerable number 
of independent memoirs. These works make an era in 
vegetable palaeontology. Their crowning general interest is 
that they bring the vegetation of the past into direct connection 
with the present. 
Although he lived to a good old age, and was never inac- 
tive, Heer was for most of his life an invalid, suffering from 
pulmonary disease. For the last twelve years his work was 
carried on at his bedside or from his bed, assisted by a devoted 
and accomplished daughter ; he seldom left his house, 
except to pass the last two winters in the milder climate of 
Italy. Last summer, having finished his "Flora Fossilis 
Arctica," in the hope of recruiting his exhausted strength he 
was removed to the most sheltered spot on the shores of the 
Lake of Geneva, but without benefit. Fie died at Lausanne, 
at his brother's house, on the 27th of September, 1883. It 
has been well said of him, in a tribute which a personal friend 
and fellow-naturalist paid to his memory, that " a man more 
lovable, more sympathetic, and a life more laborious and pure, 
one could scarcely imagine." 
Heer was elected into the Academy in May, 1877. He is 
botanically commemorated in a genus of beautiful Melastomaceous 
plants indigenous to Mexico. 
GEORGE BENTHAM. 
George Bentham, one of the most distinguished botanists 
of the present century, and at the time of his death one of the 
oldest, was born at Stoke, a suburb of Portsmouth, September 
22, 1800. He died at his house, No. 25 Wilton Place, London, 
on the 10th of September, 1884, a few days short of 
eighty-four years old. His paternal grandfather, Jeremiah 
Bentham, a London attorney or solicitor, had two sons, who 
both became men of mark, Jeremy and Samuel. The latter 
and younger had two sons, only one of whom, the subject of 
this memoir, lived to manhood. George Bentham' s mother 
was a daughter of Dr. George Fordyce, a Scottish physician 
who settled in London, was a Fellow of the Royal Society, a 
lecturer on chemistry, and the author of some able medical 
works, also of a treatise upon Agriculture and Vegetation. 
It was from bis mother that George Bentham early imbibed 
a fondness for botany. 
The early part of his life and education was somewhat 
eventful and peculiar, and in strong contrast with the later. 
His father, General, subsequently Sir Samuel Bentham, was 
an adept in naval architecture. At the age of twenty-two he 
visited the arsenals of the Baltic for the improvement of his 
knowledge ; thence he traveled far into Siberia. He became 
intimate with Prince Potemkin, by whom he was induced to 
enter the civil and afterwards the military service of the Empress 
Catharine. He took part in a naval action against the 
Turks on the Black Sea, and was rewarded with the command 
of a regiment stationed in Siberia, with which he traversed 
the country even to the frontiers of China. After ten years 
he returned to England, where his inventive skill and experience 
found a fitting field in the service of the Admiralty, in 
1 Proceedings American Academy of Arts and Science, xx. 527. (1884.) 
which he attained the post of Inspector-General of Naval 
Works. Among the services he rendered was that of bringing 
to England the distinguished engineer Isambard Mark 
Brunei. In the year 1805, General Bentham was sent by the 
Admiralty to St. Petersburg, to superintend the building in 
Russia of vessels for the British navy. He took his family 
with him ; and there began the education of George Bentham, 
in the fifth year of his age, under the charge of a Russian 
lady who could speak no English, where he learned to converse 
fluently in Russian, French, and German, besides acquiring 
the rudiments of Latin as taught by a Russian priest. 
On the way back to England, two or three years later, the 
detention of a month or two in Sweden gave opportunity for 
learning enough of Swedish to converse in that language and 
to read it with tolerable ease in after life. Returning to 
England, the family settled at Hampstead, and the children 
pursued their studies under private tutors. In the years 
1812-13, during the excitement produced by the French invasion 
of Russia and the burning of Moscow, our young polyglot 
" budded into an author, by translating (along with his 
brother and sister) and contributing to a London magazine a 
series of articles from the Russian newspapers, detailing the 
operations of the armies." In 1814, upon the downfall of 
Napoleon, the Bentham family crossed over to France, prepared 
for a long stay, remained in the country (at Tours, 
Saumur, and Paris) during the hundred days preceding 
Napoleon's final overthrow, and in 1816 Sir Samuel Bentham 
set out upon a prolonged and singular family tour, en 
caravane, through the western and southern departments of 
France. To quote from the published account from which 
most of these biographical details are drawn, and which were 
taken from Mr. Bentham's own memoranda : — 
" The cortege consisted of a two-horse coach fitted up as a 
sleeping apartment ; a long, low, two-wheeled, one-horse spring 
van for General and Mrs. Bentham, furnished with a library 
and piano ; and another, also furnished, for his daughters and 
their governess. The plan followed was to travel by day 
1 An article in "Nature," Oct. 2, 1884, by Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker. 
from one place of interest to another, bivouacking at night 
by the road, or in the garden of a friend, or in the precincts 
of the prefectures, to which latter he had credentials from 
the authorities in the capital. In this way he visited Orleans, 
Tours, Angouleme, Bordeaux, Toulouse, Montpellier, and 
finally Montauban, where a lengthened stay was made in a 
country house hired for the purpose. From Montauban (the 
cortege having broken down in some way) they proceeded still 
by private conveyances to Carcassonne, Narbonnes, Nimes, 
Tarascon, Marseilles, Toulon, Hyeres." 
It was in the early part of this tour that young Bentham's 
attention was first turned to botany. Happening to take up 
De Candolle's edition of Lamarck's " Flore Francaise," which 
his mother, who was fond of the subject, had just purchased, 
he was struck with the methodical analytical tables, and he 
proceeded immediately to apply them to the first plant he 
could lay hold of. " His success led him to pursue the diversion 
of naming every plant he met with." During his long 
stay at Montauban he entered as a student in the Protestant 
theological school of that town, pursuing "with ardor the 
courses of mathematics, Hebrew, and comparative philology, 
the latter a favorite study in after life," and at home giving 
himself to music, in which he was remarkably gifted, to Spanish, 
to botany, and, with great relish, to society. Soon after, 
the family was established upon a property of 2000 acres, 
purchased by his father in the vicinity of Montpellier. Here 
he resumed the intimacy of his boyhood with John Stuart 
Mill, who was five years his junior, and whose life-long taste 
for botany was probably fixed during this residence of seven 
or eight months in the Bentham family in the year 1820. 
About this time Bentham occupied himself with ornithology 
and then with entomology, finding time, however, for another 
line of study ; for at the age of twenty he had begun a translation 
into French of his Uncle Jeremy's " Chrestomathia," 
which was published in Paris some years afterwards ; and he 
soon after translated also the essay on " Nomenclature and 
Classification." This was followed by his own " Essai sur la 
Nomenclature et Classification," published in Paris. This, 
his original scientific production, was one of some mark, for 
it is praised by Stanley- Jevons in his recent " History of the 
Sciences." 
On attaining his majority, his elder and only brother having 
died, he was placed in management of his father's Provencal 
estate, an employment which he took up with alacrity and 
prosecuted with success, turning to practical account his methodical 
habits, his indomitable industry, and his familiarity 
with Provencal country life and language. The latter he 
spoke like a native. A language always seemed to come 
to him without effort. Meanwhile his leisure hours were 
given to philosophical studies, his holidays to botanical excursions 
into the Cevennes and the Pyrenees. In the year 1853, 
a visit to England upon business relating to his father's French 
estate, where it seemed probable that he was to spend his life, 
was followed by circumstances which gave him back to his 
native country. He brought to his Uncle Jeremy a French 
translation of the latter's " Chrestomathia " ; he made the 
acquaintance of Sir James Edward Smith, Robert Brown, Lambert, 
Don, and the other English botanists of the day ; visited 
Sir William, then Professor Hooker, at Glasgow, and Walker 
Arnott in Edinburgh ; took the latter with him the next summer 
to France, where the two botanists herborized together 
in Languedoc and the Pyrenees ; and, returning to London, he 
accepted his uncle's pressing invitation to remain and devote 
a portion of his time to the preparation of the latter's manuscripts 
for the press, at the same time pursuing legal studies at 
Lincoln's Inn. He was in due time called to the bar, and in 
1832 he held his first and last brief. In that year Jeremy 
Bentham died, bequeathing most of his property to his nephew. 
This was much less than was expected, owing to bad management 
on his uncle's part and to the extravagant sums spent 
by his executors in the publication of the philosopher's posthumous 
work. But it sufficed, in connection with the paternal 
inheritance, which fell to him in the year previous, for the 
modest independence which allowed of undistracted devotion 
to his favorite studies. These were for a time divided between 
botany, jurisprudence, and logic, not to speak of edi- 
torial work upon his father's papers relating to the management 
of the navy and the administration of the national doek- 
yards. . . 
The first publication was botanical, and was published in 
Paris, in the year 1826, — his "Catalogue des Plantes Indigenes 
des Pyrenees et du Bas Languedoc." To this is prefixed 
an interesting narrative of a botanical tour in the Pyrenees, 
and some remarks upon the mode of preparing such 
catalogues in order to bring out their greatest utility,— 
remarks which already evince the wisdom for which he was 
distinguished in after years. He also reformed and reelaborated 
our difficult genera of the district, — Cerastium, Orobanche, 
Helianthemum, and Medicago. The next, perhaps, 
was an article upon codification — wholly disagreeing with 
his uncle — which attracted the attention of Brougham, 
Flume, and O'Connell; also one upon the laws affecting larceny, 
which Sir Robert Peel complemented and made use of, 
and another on the law of real property. 
But his most considerable work of the period received scant 
attention at the time from those most interested in the subject, 
and passed from its birth into oblivion, from which only in 
these later years it has been rescued, yet without word or sign 
from its author. This work (of 287 octavo pages) was published 
in London in 1827, under the title of " Outline of a 
New System of Logic, with a critical examination of Dr. 
Whately's Elements of Logic." It was in this book that the 
quantification of the predicate was first systematically applied, 
in such wise that Stanley-Jevons x declares it to be " undoubtedly 
the most fruitful discovery made in abstract logical science 
since the time of Aristotle." Before sixty copies of the 
book had been sold, the publisher became bankrupt, and the 
whole impression of this work of a young and unknown author 
was sold for waste paper. One of the extant copies, however, 
came into the hands of the distinguished philosopher Sir 
William Hamilton, to whom the discovery of the quantification 
of the predicate was credited, and who, in claiming it, 
brought " an acrimonious charge of plagiarism " against Pro- 
C 
1 In " Contemporary Review," xxi., 1873, p. 823. 
fessor De Morgan upon this very subject. Yet this very 
book of Mr. Bentham is one of the ten placed by title at the 
head of Sir William Hamilton's article on logic in the Edinburgh 
Review for April, 1833, is once or twice referred to in 
the article, and, a dozen years later, in the course of the controversy 
with De Morgan, Sir William alluded to this article 
as containing the germs of his discovery. We may imagine 
the avidity with which De Morgan, injuriously attacked, would 
have seized upon Mr. Bentham's book if he had known of it. 
It is not so easy to understand how Mr. Bentham, although 
now absorbed in botanical researches, could have overlooked 
this controversy in the " Athenaeum," or how, if he knew of it, 
he could have kept silence. It was only at the close of the 
year 1850 that Mr. Warlow sent from the coast of Wales a 
letter to the " Athenaeum," in which he refers to Bentham's 
book as one which had long before anticipated this interesting 
discovery. Although Hamilton himself never offered explanation 
of his now unpleasant position (for the note obliquely 
referring to the matter in the second edition of his Discussions 
is not an explanation), Mr. Blaine did (in the " Athenaeum 
for February 1, 1851) immediately endeavor to discredit 
the importance of Bentham's work, and again in 1873 
("Contemporary Review," xxi.), in reply to Herbert Spencer's 
reclamation of Bentham's discovery. To this Stanley- 
Jevons made reply in the same volume (pp. 821-824) ; and 
later, in his "Principles of Science" (ii. 387), this competent 
and impartial judge, in speaking of the connection of Bentham's 
work " with the great discovery of the quantification 
of the predicate," adds : — 
" I must continue to hold that the principle of quantification 
is explicitly stated by Mr. Bentham ; and it must be regarded 
as a remarkable fact in the history of logic, that Hamilton, 
while vindicating in 1847 his own claims to originality and 
priority as against the scheme of De Morgan, should have 
overlooked the much earlier and more closely related discoveries 
of Bentham." 
It must be that Hamilton reviewed Bentham's book without 
reading it through, or that its ideas did not at the time leave 
any conscious impression upon the reviewer's mind, yet may 
have fructified afterwards. 
After his uncle's death in 1832, Mr. Bentham gave his undivided 
attention to botany. He became a F'ellow of the Linnaean 
Society in 1828. Robert Brown soon after presented 
his name to the Royal Society, but withdrew it before the election, 
to mark the dissatisfaction on the part of scientific men 
with the management of the society when a royal duke was 
made president. Consequently he did not become F. R, S. 
until 1862. In 1829, when the Royal Horticultural Society 
was much embarrassed, be accepted the position of honorary 
secretary, with his friend Lindley as associate. Under their 
management it was soon extricated from its perilous condition, 
attained its highest prosperity and renown, and did its 
best work for horticulture and botany. In 1833 he married 
the daughter of Sir Flarford Brydges, for many years British 
ambassador in Persia, and the next year he took up his residence 
in the house in Queen Square Place, Westminster, inherited 
from his uncle, in which Jeremy Bentham and his own 
paternal grandfather had dwelt for almost a century. The 
house no longer exists, but upon its site stands the western wing 
of the " Queen Anne Mansions." The summer of 1836 was 
passed in Germany, at points of botanical interest and wherever 
the principal herbaria are preserved, the whole winter in 
Vienna. Some account of this tour, and interesting memoranda 
of the botanists, gardens, and herbaria visited, communicated 
in familiar letters to Sir William Hooker, were 
printed at the time (without the author's name) in the second 
volume of the "Companion to the Botanical Magazine." 
Similar visits for botanical investigation, mingled with recreation, 
were made almost every summer to various parts of the 
continent ; in one of them he revisited the scenes of his early 
boyhood in Russia, traveled with Mrs. Bentham to the fair at 
Nijni-Novgorod, and thence to Odessa, by the rude litter-like 
conveyances of the country. 
In 1842 he removed with his herbarium to Pontrilas House 
in Herefordshire, an Elizabethan mansion belonging to his 
brother-in-law, and combined there the life of a country squire 
with that of a diligent student, until 1854, when, returning to 
London, he presented his herbarium and botanical library to 
the Royal Gardens at Kew, where they were added to the 
still larger collections of Sir William Hooker. After a short 
interval Mr. Bentham took up his residence at No. 25 Wilton 
Place, between Belgrave Square and Hyde Park, which was 
his home for the rest of his life. Thence, autumn holidays 
excepted, with perfect regularity for five days in the week he 
resorted to Kew, pursued his botanical investigations from ten 
to four o'clock, then, returning, he wrote out the notes of his 
day's work before dinner, hardly ever breaking his fast in the 
long interval. With such methodical habits, with freedom 
from professional or administrative functions which consume 
the precious time of most botanists, with steady devotion to his 
chosen work, and with nearly all authentic materials and 
needful appliances at hand or within reach, it is not surprising 
that he should have undertaken and have so well accomplished 
such a vast amount of work ; and he has the crowning merit 
and happy fortune of having completed all that he undertook. 
Nor did he decline duties of administration and counsel 
which could rightly be asked of him. The presidency of the 
Linnaean Society, which he accepted and held for eleven years 
(1863 to 1874), was no sinecure to him ; for he is said to have 
taken on no small part of the work of secretary, treasurer, and 
botanical editor. Somewhat to the surprise of his younger 
associates, who knew him only as the recluse student, he made 
proof in age of the fine talent for business and the conduct of 
affairs which had distinguished his prime in the management 
of the Horticultural Society ; and in his annual presidential 
addresses, which form a volume of permanent value, his discussions 
of general as well as of particular scientific questions 
and interests bring out prominently the breadth and fullness 
of his knowledge and the soundness of his judgment. 
The years which followed his retirement from the chair of 
the Linnaean Society, at the age of seventy-three, were no less 
laborious or less productive than those preceding ; at the age 
of eighty (as the writer can testify) the diminution of bodily 
strength had wrought no obvious abatement of mental power 
and not much of facility ; and he was able to finish in the 
spring of 1883 the great work upon which he was engaged. 
As was natural, his corporeal strength gave way when his work 
was done. After a year and a half of increasing debility be 
died simply of old age — the survivor of his wife for three or 
four years, the last of the Benthams, for he had no children, 
nor any collateral descendants of the name. 
A large part of his modest fortune was bequeathed to the 
Linnaean Society, to the Royal Society, for its scientific relief 
fund, and in other trusts for the promotion of the science to 
which his long life was so perseveringly devoted. 
The record of no small and no unimportant part of a naturalist's 
work is to be found in scattered papers, and those of 
George Bentham are quite too numerous for individual mention. 
The series begins with an article upon Labiatm, published 
in " Linnaea " in 1831 ; it closes with one in the " Journal 
of the Linnaean Society," read April 19, 1883, indicating 
the parts taken by the two authors in the elaboration of the 
" Genera Plantarum," then completed- Counting from the 
date of the Catalogue of Pyrenean plants, 1826, there are 
fifty-seven years of authorship. His first substantial volume 
in botany was the " Labiatarum Genera et Species, or a description 
of the genera and species of plants of the order 
Labiatce, with their general history, characters, affinities, and 
geographical distribution," an octavo of almost 800 pages, of 
which the first part was published in 1832, the last in 1836. 
He found even the European part of this large order in much 
confusion ; his monograph left its seventeen hundred and 
more of species so well arranged (under 107 genera and in 
tribes of his own creation) that there was little to alter, except 
as to the rank of certain groups, when he revised them 
for the " Prodromus " in 1848, and finally revised the genera 
(now increased to 136, and with estimated species almost 
doubled) for the " Genera Plantarum " in 1876. Although 
the work of a beginner, it took rank as the best extant monograph 
of its kind, namely, one of a large natural order, without 
plates. In it Mr. Bentham first set the example in any 
large way, of consulting all the available herbaria for the in- 
spection and determination of type-specimens. To this end 
he made journeys to the continent every year from 1830 to 
1834, visiting nearly all the public and larger private herbaria. 
In the years during which the monograph of Labiatce was 
in progress, Mr. Bentham elaborated and published the earlier 
of the papers which have particularly connected his name 
with North American botany. These are, first, the reports 
on some of the new ornamental plants raised in the Horticultural 
Society's Garden from seeds collected in western North 
America by Douglas, under the auspices of that society, by 
which were first made known to botanists and florists so many 
of the characteristic genera and species of Oregon and California, 
now familiar in gardens, Gilias and Nemophilas, Limnanthes, 
Phacelias, Brodiaeas, Calochorti, Eschscholtzias, Collinsias, 
and the like ; then the monograph of Ilydrophyllece 
(1834), followed the next year by that on Flosackia, and that 
on the Eriogoneoe, — all American and chiefly North American 
plants, — the first-fruits of a great harvest which even 
now has not wholly been gathered in ; the field is so vast, 
though the laborers have not been few. Later, the " Plantae 
Hartwegianae," an octavo volume begun in 1889, but finished 
in 1857 with the Californian collections ; and in 1844, the 
" Botany of the Voyage of the Sulphur," in quarto, the first 
part of which relates to Californian botany. The various papers 
upon South American botany are even more numerous ; 
one of them being that in which Heliamphora, of British 
Guiana, a new genus of Pitcher Plants, of the Sarracenia 
family, was established. 
Bentham's labors upon the great order Pieguminosce began 
early, with his " Commentationes de Leguminosarum Generibus," 
published in the Annals of the Vienna Museum, being 
the work of a winter's holiday (1836-7) passed in that capital 
in the herbarium then directed by Endlicher. This was followed 
by a series of papers, mostly monographs of genera, 
in Hooker's " Journal of Botany," in the " Journal of the 
Linnaean Society," and elsewhere, by the elaboration of the 
order for the imperial "Flora Brasiliensis," and later, by the 
" Revision of the Genus Cassia," and that of the suborder <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>File Delivery Service/1.1</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#ffffe8" text="#000000" link="#0000ff" vlink="#800080" alink="#ff0000">
<strong><font size="-1">Harvard University Library / File Delivery Service (prod/1.1)</font>
<hr>
<font size="+2">File Delivery Service</font></strong>
<p>FDS internal error.<br>edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException<br>Problem communicating with DRS services (Error reported by DRS service): edu.harvard.hul.ois.drs2.callservice.CallServiceException: Item not found. Could not find file with role OBJECT_DESCRIPTOR</p>
<hr>
<address><font size="-1">
Wed, Jul 10, 2019 22:53:02 EDT / Copyright 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
</font></address>
</html>

popularity of this handy volume, bringing the light of full 
knowledge and sound methods to guide the beginner's way, illustrates 
the advantage of having elementary works prepared 
by a master of the subject, whenever the master will take the 
necessary pains. To the same end, the author prepared 
for this volume an excellent and terse introduction to structural 
and descriptive botany, which has been prefixed to 
all the Colonial Floras. In the first edition to this British 
Flora it was attempted to use or to give English names to the 
genera and species throughout. This could be done only in 
such a familiar and well-trodden field as Britain, where almost 
every plant was familiar ; but even here it failed, and in 
later editions the popular names Were relegated to a subordinate 
position. 
It has been stated that Mr. Bentham was over sixty years 
old when he undertook the " Flora Australiensis," and he 
was seventy-seven when he brought this vast work to completion, 
assisted only in notes and preliminary studies by 
Baron von Mueller of Melbourne. About the same time he 
courageously undertook the still greater task of a new " Genera 
Plantarum," to be worked out, not, like that of Endlicher, 
mainly by the compilation of published characters into a common 
formula, but by an actual examination of the extant materials, 
primarily those of the Kew herbarium, — this work, 
however, in conjunction with his intimate associate, Sir Joseph 
Hooker. This work is the only " joint production "in which 
Mr. Bentham ever engaged. The relations and position of 
the two authors made the association every way satisfactory, 
and the magnitude of the task made it necessary. The training 
and the experience of the two associates were very different 
and in some ways complemental, one having the greatest 
herbarium knowledge of any living botanist, the other, the 
widest and keenest observer of vegetable life under " whatever 
climes the sun's bright circle warms," as well as of 
antarctic regions which it warms very little. It would be 
expected, on the principle " juniores ad labores," that the 
laboring oar would be taken by the younger of the pair. It 
was long and severe work for both ; but the veteran was hap- 
pily quite free from, and his companion heavily weighted by, 
onerous official duties and cares ; and so it came to pass that 
about two thirds of the orders and genera were elaborated by 
Mr. Bentham. In April, 1883, the completion of the work 
(i. e., of the genera of Phaenogamous plants, to which it was 
limited) closed this long and exemplary botanical career; 
and the short account which he gave to the Linnaean Society 
on the nineteenth of that month, specifying the conduct of 
the work and the part of the respective authors, was his last 
publication. 
In this connection mention should also be made of the essays 
(which he simply calls " Notes ") upon some of the more 
important orders which he investigated for the " Genera 
Plantarum," — the Compositce, the Campanulaceous and the 
Oleaceous orders, the Monocotyledonece as to classification, 
the Euphorbiacece, the Orchis family, the Cyperacece and the 
Graminece. These are not mere abstracts, issued in advance, 
but critical dissertations with occasional discussions of some 
general or particular question of terminology or morphology. 
When collected they form a stout volume, which, along with 
the volume made up of his anniversary addresses when president 
of the Linnaean Society, and the paper on the progress 
and state of systematic botany, read to the British Association 
for the Advancement of Science in 1874, should be much 
considered by those who would form a just idea of the largeness 
of Mr. Bentham's knowledge and the character of his 
work. 
It will have been seen that Mr. Bentham confined himself 
to the Phaenogamia, to morphological, taxonomical, and descriptive 
work, not paying attention to the Cryptogamia below 
the Ferns, nor to vegetable anatomy, physiology, or palaeontology. 
He was what will now be called a botanist of the old 
school. Up to middle age and beyond he used rather to regard 
himself as an amateur, pursuing botany as an intellectual 
exercise. " There are diversities of gifts ; " perhaps no 
professional naturalist ever made more of his, certainly no 
one ever labored more diligently, nor indeed more successfully 
over so wide a field, within these chosen lines. For extent 
and variety of good work accomplished, for an intuitive sense 
of method, for lucidity and accuracy, and for insight, George 
Bentham may fairly be compared with Linnaeus, De Candolle, 
and Robert Brown. 
Flis long life was a perfect and precious example, much 
needed in this age, of persevering and thorough devotion to 
science while unconstrained as well as untrammeled by professional 
duty or necessity. For those endowed with leisure, 
to " live laborious days " in her service, it is not a common 
achievement. 
The tribute which the American Academy of Sciences pays 
to the memory of a deceased foreign honorary member 
might here fittingly conclude. But one who knew him long 
and well may be allowed to add a word upon the personal 
characteristics of the subject of this memorial ; the more so 
that he is himself greatly indebted for generous help. For, 
long ago, when in special need of botanical assistance, Mr. 
Bentham invited him and his companion to his house at Pontrilas, 
and devoted the greater part of his time for two months 
to this service. Mr. Bentham's great reserve and dryness in 
general intercourse, and his avoidance of publicity, might 
give the impression of an unsympathetic nature ; but he was 
indeed most amiable, warm-hearted, and even genial, " the 
kindest of helpmates," the most disinterested of friends. 
AUGUSTUS FENDLER. 
After Dr. Engelmann's death, the beginning of a notice 
of Mr. Fendler was found upon his table, from which it was 
learned that he had died at Trinidad, some time previous. 
Inquiries sent to the Port of Spain, where he had for several 
years resided, remain unanswered. An autobiographical account 
which he addressed to a correspondent (and which, with 
some of his letters, we hope will before long be printed) enables 
us to state that Mr. Fendler was born at Gumbinnen, 
on the easternmost borders of Prussia, January 10, 1813, lost 
his father in infancy, was sent to the gymnasium of the town 
when twelve years old, but was at sixteen apprenticed to the 
town clerk, where, perhaps, he perfected the neat and clear 
handwriting with which his correspondents are familiar. 
Having a fondness for mathematics and chemistry, he obtained 
in 1834, upon examination, a nomination to the Royal 
Polytechnic School at Berlin, but relinquished it after a year 
on account of delicate health. In 1836 he came from Bremen 
to Baltimore, " with a couple of dollars in his pocket," worked 
in a tan-yard in Philadelphia, then in a lamp factory in New 
York; in 1838 he traveled in the most economical way to 
St. Louis, which required thirty days, and was employed by a 
lamp-maker who made " spirit-gas " for lighting public-houses, 
coal-gas being then unknown so far west. Soon after, he 
made his way to New Orleans and to Texas, where he was 
witness to the ravages of yellow fever in the summer and fall 
of 1839. He returned to Illinois, broken in health and empty 
in purse, taught school for some time ; then, the spirit of wandering 
and of solitude coming strongly upon him, he took possession 
of an uninhabited island in the Missouri River, about 
three hundred miles above St. Louis, where he enjoyed a hermit's 
life for six months, and until a great spring rise of the 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxix. 169. (1885.) 
river threatened to sweep away his cabin, when he took to his 
canoe, and dropped down the stream among the floating logs 
and masses of ice. In 1844 he returned to Old Prussia on a 
visit, at Konigsberg made the acquaintance of Ernest Meyer, 
the professor of botany, and learned from him — what he 
would have been most glacl to know before — that dried specimens 
of plants for the herbarium might be disposed of at a 
reasonable price. Returning to St. Louis,he began to collect 
plants in this view, took the botanical specimens to Dr. Engelmann, 
who gave him botanical assistance and encouragement. 
11l 1846 Dr. Engelmann and the writer of this notice obtained 
permission for the transportation of Mr. Fendler and his luggage 
along with the body of United States troops which took 
possession of Santa Fe, New Mexico ; there he remained for 
about a year, and made his well-known New Mexican collection, 
the first-fruits of the botany of that interesting district. 
In 1849 he attempted another western botanical expedition, 
this time with Salt Lake in view. But on the plains he lost 
all his drying-paper in a flood of the Little Blue River ; and 
he returned to St. Louis, to find that all his collections, books, 
journals, and other possessions had been burnt in the great 
conflagration which had just devastated that city. He now 
sought a different climate, and, at the approach of winter, 
went to the Isthmus of Panama for four months, made at 
Chagres an interesting botanical collection, returned by way 
of New Orleans to Arkansas, and to Memphis on the Tennessee 
side of the river, where for three years he carried on 
the camphene-light business, botanizing in the vicinity when 
he could. In 1854, the introduction of gas having made his 
occupation unprofitable, and a craving for new scenes being 
strong upon him, he sailed for La Guayra, went up to Caraccas 
and thence to Colonia Tovar, 6500 feet above the sea, 
built his cabin on the mountain side, where he lived four or 
five years and amassed his large and fine Venezuelan collections 
of dried plants, so well known in the principal herbaria 
of the world. His principal companions were his thermometer 
and barometer, and his careful meteorological observations 
were published by the Smithsonian Institution, in the report 
of the year 1857. Returning to Missouri in 1864, he bought 
some wild land at Allenton, cultivated and lived on it for 
seven years (except one winter passed in the herbarium at 
Cambridge), having the companionship and assistance of a 
half-brother who had joined him, and whom, being rather 
feeble-minded, he took care of for the rest of his life. In 
1871, having sold his place in Missouri, he returned again to 
Prussia, intending to remain in his native country. But he 
soon longed for the New World, to which he returned in 
1873 ; he settled in Wilmington, Delaware, where, having the 
botanical companionship of Mr. Canby, he again interested 
himself in his favorite pursuits, — but now much more in 
speculative physics. For years the thoughts of his solitary 
hours had turned upon the cause of gravitation and its probable 
connection with other forces, and while at Wilmington 
he wrote (and unhappily printed at his own expense) a thin 
octavo volume, entitled " The Mechanism of the Universe." 
Repeated attacks of acute rheumatism constrained him to 
seek again a tropical climate, this time the island of Trinidad. 
He and his brother landed at the Port of Spain in 
June, 1877, where he passed the remainder of his days, living 
mainly on the products of the small plot of land which he 
purchased, renewing his old interest and activity in making 
botanical observations and collections, especially among the 
Ferns, of which he sent to Professor Eaton collections worthy 
of his better days. But, having exhausted in this respect the 
field within his immediate reach, and lost the vigor needed for 
laborious excursions, little had been heard of him for the past 
few years, and it is only indirectly that the fact of his death 
has been made known to us. 
It is needless to say that Fendler was a quick and keen 
observer and an admirable collector. He had much literary 
taste, and had formed a very good literary style in English, 
as his descriptive letters show. He was excessively diffident 
and shy, but courteous and most amiable, gentle, and delicately 
refined. Many species of his own discovery commemorate 
his name, as also a well-marked genus, a Saxifragaceous 
shrub, which is winning its way into ornamental cultivation. 
CHARLES WRIGHT. 
Charles Wright died on the 11th of August, at Wethersfield, 
Connecticut, at the home where he was born on the 29th 
of October, 1811, and where the early as well as the later 
years of his life were passed. He received his education in 
the grammar school of his native village and at Yale College, 
which be entered in 1831, graduating in 1835. His fondness 
for botany was developed while he was in college, although, 
so far as we can learn, he had no teacher. The opportunity 
of gratifying this predilection in an inviting region may have 
determined his acceptance, almost immediately after graduation, 
of an offer to teach in a private family at Natchez, Mississippi. 
Within a year pecuniary reverses of his employer 
terminated this engagement. At this time there was a flow 
of immigration into Texas, then an independent republic; 
and Mr. Wright joining in it, in the spring of 1837 made his 
way from the Mississippi to the Sabine, and over the border, 
chiefly on foot, botanizing as he went. Making his headquarters 
for two or three years at a place then called Zarvala, 
on the Neches, he occupied himself with land-surveying, explored 
the surrounding country, " learned to dress deer-skins 
after the manner of the Indians, and to make moccasins and 
leggins," "became a pretty fair deer-hunter," and inured himself 
to the various hardships of a frontier life at that period. 
When the business of surveying fell off he took again to 
teaching ; and in the year 1844 he opened a botauical correspondence 
with the present writer, sending an interesting collection 
of the plants of eastern Texas to Cambridge. In 1845 
he went to Rutersville in Fayette County, and for a year or 
two he was a teacher in a so-called college at that place, or in 
private families there and at Austin, devoting all his leisure 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxxi. 12. (1886.) 
to his favorite avocation. In the summer of 1847-8 he had 
an opportunity of carrying his botanical explorations farther 
south and west. His friend, Dr. Veitch, whom he had known 
in eastern Texas, raised a company of volunteers for the 
Mexican war, then going on (Texas having been annexed 
to the United States), and gave Mr. Wright a position with 
moderate pay and light duties. This took him to Eagle Pass 
on the Mexican frontier, where he botanized on both sides of 
the river. He returned to the north in the autumn of that 
year, with his botanical collections, and passed the ensuingwinter 
in Connecticut and at Cambridge. 
In the spring of 1849, Mr. Wright returned to Texas, and, 
at the beginning of the summer, with some difficulty obtained 
leave to accompany the small body of United States troops 
which was sent across the unexplored country from San Antonio 
to El Paso on the Rio Grande. Notwithstanding some 
commendatory letters from Washington, no other assistance 
was afforded than the conveyance of his trunk and collecting 
paper. He made the whole journey on foot, boarded with 
one of the messes of the transportation train, and endured 
many privations and hardships. The return to the sea-board, 
in autumn, was by rather a more northerly route and under 
somewhat less untoward conditions. The interesting collection 
thus made first opened to our knowledge the botany of 
the western part of Texas. It was published, as to the Poly-petaPae 
and Compositce, in the third volume of the " Smithsonian 
Contributions to Knowledge," as " Plantae Wrightianae," 
Part I, in 1852. 
A year and more was then passed in the central portion of 
Texas, awaiting the opportunity for other distant explorations, 
supporting himself in part by teaching a small school. At 
length, in the spring of 1851, he joined the party under Colonel 
Graham, one of the commissioners for surveying and 
determining the United States and Mexican boundary from 
the Rio Grande to the Pacific, accepting a position partly as 
botanist, partly as one of the surveyors, which assured a comfortable 
maintenance and the wished for opportunity for 
botanical exploration in an untouched field. Attached only 
to Colonel Graham's party, he returned with him without 
reaching farther westward than about the middle of what is 
now the territory of Arizona, and in the summer of 1852 he 
returned with his extensive collections to San Antonio, and 
thence to St. Louis, to deliver his Cactacece to Dr. Engelmann, 
and with the remainder to Cambridge. These collections 
were the basis of the second part of " Plantae Wrightianae," 
published in 1853, and, in connection with those of Dr. Parry, 
Professor Thurber, and Dr. J. M. Bigelow, etc., of the Botany 
of the Mexican Boundary Survey, published in 1859. As 
Mr. Wright collected more largely than his associate botanists, 
and divided his collections into sets, his specimens are incorporated 
into a considerable number of herbaria, at home and 
abroad, and are the types of many new species and genera. 
No name is more largely commemorated in the botany of 
Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona than that of Charles Wright. 
It is an Acanthaceous genus of this district, of his own discovery, 
that bears the name of Carlowrightia. Surely no 
botanist ever better earned such scientific remembrance by 
entire devotion, acute observation, severe exertion, and perseverance 
under hardship and privation. 
Mr. Wright's next expedition was made under more pleasant 
conditions. It was a long one around the world, as botanist 
to the North Pacific Exploring Expedition, fitted out 
under Captain Ringgold, who was during the cruise succeeded 
by Commander John Rodgers. After passing the winter of 
1852-3 at his home in Connecticut and at Cambridge, he 
joined this expedition in the spring, and sailed in the United 
States ship " Vincennes " from Norfolk, Virginia, on the 11th 
of June. The collections made when touching at Madeira and 
Cape Verde were of course unimportant ; but at Simon's Bay, 
just round the Cape of Good Hojie, a stay of six weeks resulted 
in a very considerable collection of about 860 species 
within a small area, the Cape being wonderfully crowded 
with all kinds of plants. The voyage was thence to Sydney 
and through the Coral Sea to Hongkong, which was reached 
about the middle of March, 1854. The collection of over 500 
species of Phaenogamous plants, which was made during that 
spring and summer upon this little island, and supplemented 
in the spring of 1855, was in part the basis of Bentham's 
" Flora Hongkongensis." In the autumn of 1854, interesting 
collections were made on the Bonin and Loo Choo Islands, 
and later upon the islands between the latter and Japan. 
Still more extensive and important were the collections made 
in Japan, especially those of the northern island, although the 
stay was brief. Also those made in Behring's Straits, mainly 
on Kiene or Arakamtchetchene Island, on the verge of the 
Polar Sea, where the scientific members of the expedition 
passed the month of August and a part of September, 1855. 
Reaching San Francisco in October, the season being unpropitious 
for botany, Mr. Wright was detached from the expedition, 
and came home by way of San Juan del Sur and 
Nicaragua, botanizing for a few weeks upon an island in the 
Lake, and thence by way of Greytown to New York. 
In the following autumn (of 1856) Mr. Wright began his 
prolific exploration of the botany of Cuba. Landing at Santiago 
de Cuba, on the southeastern part of the island, he 
passed the winter of 1856-7 and the greater part of the ensuing 
summer in that nearly virgin district, most hospitably 
entertained by his countryman, Mr. George Bradford, and 
among the caffetals of the mountains by M. Lescaille, returning 
home with his rich collections early in the autumn. A 
year later he revisited Cuba, was again received by his devoted 
friends, extended his botanical explorations to the northern 
coast, and also farther westward, exchanging the dense virgin 
forest for open Pine-woods, like those of the Atlantic southern 
States, stopping at various hatos or cattle-farms on his 
route, but reaching better accommodations at Bayamo, when 
his kind host, Dr. Don Manuel Yero, assisted him in making 
some profitable mountain excursions. In the winter and 
spring of 1861 he was again domiciled with the Lescailles at 
Monte Verde and at the other coffee plantations of this kind 
family ; and from thence he was able to extend his herborizations 
to the eastern coast from Baracoa to Cape May si. The 
next winter he made his way westward to near the centre of 
the island, making headquarters at the sugar-plantation of the 
hospitable Don Simon de Cardenas, thence visiting the Sienaga 
de Zapata, a great marshy tract toward the south coast. In 
the early summer he transferred his indefatigable operations 
to the Vuelt-abajo, as it is called, or that part of Cuba 
westward of Habana, making his home at Balestena, a cattlefarm 
at the southern base of the mountains opposite Bahia 
Honda, where he was long most hospitably entertained by Don 
Jose Blain and Don F. A. Sauvalle. From thence he pushed 
his explorations nearly to the southwestern extremity of the 
island at Cape San Antonio. In the summer of 1864 he came 
home with his large collections, remaining there and at Cambridge 
for about a year. 
In the autumn of 1865 he went again and for the last time 
to Cuba, again traversed the Vuelt-abajo in various directions, 
proceeded by steamer to Trinidad, and botanized in the mountains 
behind that town ; thence by way of Santiago he revisited 
the scenes of his earlier explorations and the surviving friends 
who had efficiently promoted them. The oldest and best of 
them, the elder Lescaille, was now dead. In the month of 
July, 1867, our persevering explorer came home. 
Mr. Wright's Cuban botanical collections, from time to 
time distributed into sets, with numbers, were acquired by several 
of the principal herbaria, the fullest sets of the Phaenogamous 
and vascular Cryptogamous plants, by the herbarium 
of Cambridge, and by the late Professor Grisebach of Gottingen. 
Professor Grisebach was in these years engaged with 
his " Flora of the British West Indies " ; so that he gladly 
undertook the determination of the plants of Cuba. They 
were accordingly mainly published in Grisebach's two papers, 
" Plantae Wrightianae e Cuba Orientali," in the " Memoirs 
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences," 1860 and 
1862, and in his " Catalogus Plantarum Cubensium exhibens 
collectionem Wrightianam aliasque minores ex Insula Cuba 
missas," an Bvo volume, published in Leipsic in 1866. The 
latter work enumerates the Ferns and their allies, but those 
for the earlier part were published in 1860 by Professor 
Eaton, in his "Filices Wrightianae et Fendlerianae," a paper 
in the eighth volume of the " Memoirs of the American Acad- 
emy." The later collections were incompletely published in 
the " Flora Cubana," a volume issued by F. A. Sauvalle at 
Habana, in 1873 and later, a revision of Grisebach's Catalogue 
(without the references, but with Spanish vernacular 
names attached) which was made by Mr. Wright, who added 
the descriptions of a good many new species. The only other 
direct publication by Mr. Wright is his " Notes on Jussiaea," 
in the tenth volume of the Linnaean Society's Journal. As to 
the lower Cryptogams, Mr. Wright's very rich collections 
were distributed in sets and published by specialists : the 
Fungi, by Berkeley and the late Dr. Curtis ; the Musci, by 
the late Mr. Sullivant; the Lichenes, by Professor Tuckerman 
in large part, and certain tribes quite recently by Miiller 
of Geneva. So Mr. Wright's name is deeply impressed upon 
the botany of the Queen of the Antilles. 
There was a prospect that he might do some good work 
for the botany of San Domingo ; for in 1871 a government 
vessel was sent to make some exploration of that island, and 
Mr. Wright went with it. It was in winter, the dry season, 
and the excursion across the country was hurried and unsatisfactory 
; so that the small collection made in this, his last 
distant botanizing, was not of much account. 
Mr. Wright's botanizing days were now essentially over. 
He made, indeed, a visit to the upper part of Georgia in the 
spring of 1875. But this was mainly for recuperation from 
the effects of a transient illness, and for seeing again a relative 
and companion of his youth, from whom he had long been 
separated. A large part of several years was passed at Cambridge, 
taking a part of the work of the Gray Flerbarium ; 
and one winter was passed at the Bussey Institution, in aiding 
his associate of the South Pacific cruise, Professor Storer. 
Of late there fell to him the principal charge of the family at 
Wethersfield, consisting of a brother who had become an 
invalid, and of two sisters in feeble health, all unmarried and 
aging serenely together. By degrees his own strength was 
sapped by some organic disease of the heart, which had given 
him serious warning ; and on the 11th of August he suddenly 
succumbed, while making his usual round at evening to 
look after the domestic animals of the homestead. Not returning 
when expected, he was sought for; the body was found 
as if in quiet repose, but the spirit had departed. 
Mr. Wright was a person of low stature and well-knit 
frame, hardy rather than strong, scrupulously temperate, a 
man of simple ways, always modest and unpretending, but 
direct and downright in expression, most amiable, trusty, and 
religious. He accomplished a great amount of useful and 
excellent work for botany in the pure and simple love of it ; 
and his memory is held in honorable and grateful remembrance 
by his surviving associates. 
GEORGE W. CLINTON. 
George W. Clinton died, at Albany, on the 7th of September 
last, in the seventy-eighth year of his age. He was 
the son of DeWitt Clinton, one of the most distinguished 
governors, and the grand-nephew of George Clinton, the first 
governor of the State of New York. He was born on the 13th 
of April, 1807, whether in the city of New York or in the 
home on Long Island is uncertain. He became a student in 
Albany Academy in the year 1816, when his father entered 
upon his first tenure of office as governor, entered Hamilton 
College in 1821, was graduated in 1825, was led by his early 
scientific tastes to the study of medicine, which he pursued for 
a year or two ; at least he attended two courses of lectures at 
the then flourishing country medical school at Fairfield, New 
York. There his acquaintance with Professor James Hadley 
further developed his fondness for chemistry and botany, as it 
did that of the writer of this notice a few years afterwards. He 
also came under the instruction or companionship of Dr. Lewis 
C. Beck, a younger brother of his medical preceptor Dr. T. 
Romeyn Beck, attended a course of private lectures on botany 
given by Dr. William Tully, entered into correspondence 
with Rafinesque, Torrey, etc., and so bid fair to give himself 
to scientific studies, as we may suppose with the approval of 
his father, who, it is well known, had a decided scientific bent. 
But Governor Clinton's death in February, 1828, wrought a 
change in his prospects and in the course of his life. Acting 
upon the advice of his father's friend, Ambrose Spencer, the 
distinguished chief justice of the State, he took up the study 
of law, attended the law lectures of Judge Gould at Litchfield, 
Connecticut, and continued his studies in Canandaigua, New 
York, in the office of John C. Spencer, whose daughter he 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxxi. 17. (1886.) 
married. Admitted to the bar in 1831, he established himself 
at Buffalo in 1836, and practised his profession most 
acceptably until the year 1854, when he became judge of the 
superior court of that city. This honorable position he continued 
to hold with entire approbation until January, 1878, 
when he retired under the provision of the constitution upon 
attaining the age of seventy years. Then he resumed the 
practice of the law for two or three years ; but at length he 
took up his residence in Albany, partly for the more convenient 
rendering of his service as a regent of the university 
of the State, and its vice-chancellor, but mainly for investigating 
and editing the papers and writings of his great-uncle 
George Clinton. On the afternoon of the 7th of September he 
took an accustomed walk in the Rural Cemetery of Albany, 
and there he died, probably quite instantaneously ; for when 
his body was found, two or three hours later, some withered 
sprays of White Melflot, which he had gathered, were still 
clasped in his hand. 
Judge Clinton's professional life need not here be considered. 
I did not know him, but knew of him, as a botanist 
in bis. younger days. About the year 1860, after buying a 
botanical book for his daughter, the turning over its pages 
revived an almost forgotten delight ; and when his attention 
was again given to the flowers he had so long neglected, we 
soon came into correspondence. " I might have become a 
respectable naturalist," he writes, " but was torn from it in 
my youth. ... To become a botanist is now hopeless ; I am, 
and must remain a mere collector. But then I collect for 
my friends and for the Buffalo Society of the Natural Sciences. 
If I can please my friends and help the Society it 
pleases me. I want it to succeed. Money I cannot give it, 
and I give it all I can, the benefit of my example and pleasant 
labors." An instructive and pleasant, and on his part a 
sprightly correspondence it has been, and most ardent and 
successful were his efforts in the development of the Society 
of the Natural Sciences over which he presided, and especially 
of its herbarium which he founded. In the spring of 
1864 he wrote : " To-morrow I believe I shall be able to mail 
you my ' Preliminary List of the Plants of Buffalo.' And I 
demand that immediately upon its reception, you write me, 
saying ' pretty well for you.' Ido feel gratified that I have 
at last made the mitiest mite of a contribution to science. 
I know how extremely minute it is. I would not be so exacting 
but for the fact that my letter-book is just full, and I want 
to commence a new one with a letter from you, I mean with a 
note from you, a letter is too ambitious." 
As this modest Preliminary List exemplifies the beginning, 
so the full and critically prepared " Catalogue of the Native 
and Naturalized Plants of the City of Buffalo and its Vicinity," 
(pp. 215), published in 1882-3, marks the conclusion and 
shows the fruits of Judge Clinton's work upon the flora of 
the district around Buffalo. This catalogue was indeed prepared 
and published by his near friend and associate Mr. Day, 
with a thoroughness and judgment which have been much 
commended. But the collection and elaboration of the materials, 
the critical determination of the species, and the preparation 
of the " Clinton Herbarium," as it is now appropriately 
called, were essentially his own work in the horm subsccivce 
of a busy professional life. If during middle life and while 
making his way in his chosen vocation he abandoned his early 
scientific avocation, he took it up again when he had achieved 
a position which allowed some well-earned leisure, and he pursued 
it with an added zeal, energy, and acumen, which should 
give his name a place among the botanical worthies, —to be 
remembered after those who knew and appreciated and loved 
him have passed away. A little Scirpus specifically bears his 
name ; but I never see the modest Liliaceous plant of our 
northern woods, called Clintonia in honor of the father, without 
associating it with the son. 
Judge Clinton's contributions to the literature of the legal 
profession consisted mainly of his " Digest of the Decisions 
of the Law and Equity Courts of the State of New York," 
in three stout volumes. But he was a not unfrequent and a 
fascinating writer in the newspapers of the city, an occasional 
lecturer upon historical as well as scientific topics, and an 
organizer or promoter of every good civic work. He was a per- 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. 
478 
son of marked and distinct individuality. It had been said of 
him that " he was not like anybody else, did not look like anybody 
else, and did not talk like anybody else." But his ways 
and conversation were peculiarly winning and delightful. Of 
a rather large family of children, four survive, two of them 
sons, and a goodly number of grandchildren. 
EDMOND BOISSIER. 
Edmond Boissier died on the 25th of September, at his 
country residence in Canton Vaud, Switzerland, at the age of 
seventy-five years and three months. Having known him personally 
almost from the beginning of his botanical career, 
which has been so honorable and distinguished, it is a melancholy 
satisfaction as well as a duty, to pay this passing tribute 
to his memory. 
Boissier came from one of those worthy families which were 
lost to France and gained to Geneva by the revocation of the 
Edict of Nantes, — a family that has proved its talents and 
high character in more than one of its members. Madame 
the Countess de Gasparin is a sister next to him in as:e, and 
the two had their education very much in common. He was 
born at Geneva, May 25, 1810, brought up and educated 
there, except that the summers were passed at his father's 
place at Valeyres, which he in time inherited, and where his 
life was closed. From his youth he was fond of natural history 
and of travel. It was not in his disposition, nor of the 
Genevese spirit of that day, to lead an aimless life ; so, when 
he came to choose what may be called his profession, it was 
natural that, at Geneva, in the days of the elder De Candolle, 
he took to botany. He showed his great good sense by 
his early judicious choice of a field and by his unbroken devotion 
to it. To the Mediterranean region, to southern Spain, 
and the Orient most of his work relates. After a year or two 
of careful preparation he went to Spain, in 1837, explored 
especially Granada and the eastern Pyrenees, and between 
1839 and 1845 brought out his " Voyage Botanique dans le 
midi de l'Espagne," in two large quarto volumes, the first of 
narrative and plates, one hundred and eighty in number, the 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, xxxi. 20. (1886.) 
second of descriptive matter relating to the Granadan flora. 
Among the species he brought to light was the Abies Pinsapo, 
the beautiful Fir-tree now so well known in cultivation. 
His narrative, besides its botanical interest, is charming 
reading. 
In 1842, after his marriage to his cousin, of the De la Rive 
family, he traveled with his wife in Greece, Anatolia, Syria, 
and Egypt. It was to his dear companion that he dedicated 
two of their joint discoveries, Omphalodes Lucilice and 
Chionodoxa Luciiim. In 1849 he experienced the great 
sorrow of his life in her death from typhoid fever, during a 
second journey in the south of Spain. Between 1842 and 
1854 he published the first series of his " Diagnoses Plantarum 
Orientalium No varum," filling two volumes, and in 1855 
the second series of almost equal extent ; in 1848 he completed 
his monograph of the Plumbaginacece ; in 1862 he 
promptly finished his conscientious elaboration of the great 
genus Euphorbia for De Candolle's " Prodromus," and in 1866 
brought out the " Icones Euphorbiarum," of one hundred and 
twenty folio plates from outline drawings by Heyland. In 
1881 he made a trip to Norway with his associate Renter. 
Not to mention other journeys, he was again in Spain and 
adjacent countries in 1877, and lastly in 1881, his eighth 
visit, — then in wretched health. Passing by scattered papers 
of his, we come to his great work, the " Flora Orientalis," in 
five octavo volumes. It comprehends Greece and Turkey up 
to Dalmatia and the Balkans ; the Crimea ; Egypt up to the 
first cataracts ; northern Arabia down to the tropical line ; 
Asia Minor, Armenia, Syria, and Mesopotamia ; Turkestan 
up to 45° of latitude, Persia, Afghanistan, and Beloochistan 
— that is, up to the borders of India. The first volume was 
published in 1867 ; the fifth, in 1884, brings the work down 
to its conclusion with the Pteridophytes ; and the manuscript 
for a supplementary volume, for recent discoveries and some 
reelaboration, was about half finished when he laid down his 
pen under an attack seemingly no worse than the many he 
had recovered from, but which now terminated his earthly 
life. 
It was a noble life, shadowed by an early bereavement, and 
in later years worn by painful disease, — the manly life of 
one who lived simply and wrought industriously where many 
others with his independent fortune would have lived idly and 
luxuriously; and he was no less a loyal and public-spirited 
citizen. Upon an occasion when, long ago, we met him at 
Geneva, he had no time for botanical parlance, for he was 
doing duty in the ranks of the federal army. Later, at a time 
of commotion at Geneva, he helped to quell a revolutionary 
riot, and received a painful bayonet wound in the service. 
True to his ancestry, he was a devoted Protestant Christian, 
a trusted member of the synod of the Free Church in Canton 
Vaud, where he lived when not in winter residence at Geneva, 
and where his assiduous attentions to the poor and sick will 
be remembered. He was a man of fine presence, and till past 
middle life of much bodily vigor. As a botanist he gave himself 
to systematic work only, for which he had a fine tact, and, 
like the school in which he was bred, perhaps a faculty of 
excessive discrimination. No man living knew the Europeo- 
Caucasian plants so well, or could describe them better ; and 
his herbarium must be, with possibly one rival, the most extensive 
and valuable private collection in Europe. He loved 
living flowers as well, and rejoiced in his choice conservatory 
collections at Rivage, on the shores of the Leman, and in his 
well -stocked rock-works of alpine plants which adorn his 
grounds at Valeyres. 
A charming biographical notice by one who knew him well 
through his whole life, M. De Candolle, is contained in the 
"Archives des Science" of the " Bibliotheque Universelle 
de Geneva " for October last. 
JOHANNES AUGUST CHRISTIAN RŒPER. 
Johannes August Christian Rceper died on the 17th 
of March, 1884, at the age of eighty-four. He had been for 
some time the oldest botanist we know of, at least the oldest 
botanical author ; for his first work, a monograph of the German 
species of Euphorbia, was published in 1824. He was 
director of the Botanic Garden at Basle in 1828, when he 
published his classical paper " De Organis Plantarum," and 
he may have been so in 1826, when he contributed to Seringe's 
" Melanges Botaniques " his paper on the nature of flowers and 
inflorescences, which first put the latter upon a scientific basis 
and essentially established the present nomenclature. He was 
botanical professor there in 1830, when he published his tract 
"De Floribus et Affinitatibus Balsaminearum." In these essays 
he gave the promise of being one of the foremost morphological 
botanists of the age. Some time before the year 1840 
he was translated to Rostock, where he held the botanical professorship 
for more than forty years, but without fulfilling the 
promise of his youth by additional contributions to the science 
of any considerable importance. There are, however, some 
articles from him in the " Botanische Zeitung," and other German 
periodicals, the latest in the year 1859. In 1851 he was 
chosen a Foreign Member of the Linnaean Society of London. 
We find no record of the time or place of his nativity, but we 
infer from a statement in the preface of his work on Euphorbia, 
which was published at Gottingen, that he was a German and 
not a Swiss. He is said to have been most amiable, and of 
deep religious convictions. 
1 American Journal of Science and Arts, 3 ser., xxxi. 22. (1886.) 
LOUIS AGASSIZ. 
There is no need to give an abstract of the contents of these 
fascinating volumes, 1 for everybody is reading them. Most are 
probably wishing for more personal details, especially of the 
American life ; but the editorial work is so deftly and delicately 
done, and " the story of an intellectual life marked by rare 
coherence and unity " is so well arranged to tell itself and 
make its impression, that we may thankfully accept what has 
been given us, though the desired " fullness of personal narrative 
" be wanting. 
Twelve years have passed since Agassiz was taken from us. 
Yet to some of us it seems not very long ago that the already 
celebrated Swiss naturalist came over in the bloom of his 
manly beauty to charm us with his winning ways, and inspire 
us with his overflowing enthusiasm, as he entered upon the 
American half of that career which has been so beneficial to 
the interests of natural science. There are not many left of 
those who attended those first Lowell Lectures in the autumn 
of 1846, — perhaps all the more taking for the broken English 
in which they were delivered, — and who shared in the 
delight with which, in a supplementary lecture, he more fluently 
addressed his audience in his mother-tongue. 
In these earliest lectures he sounded the note of which his 
last public utterance was the dying cadence. For, as this 
biography rightly intimates, his scientific life was singularly 
entire and homogeneous, —if not uninfluenced yet quite unchanged 
by the transitions which have marked the period. In 
a small circle of naturalists, almost the first that was assembled 
to greet him on his coming to this country, and of which the 
writer is the sole survivor, when Agassiz was inquired of as to 
1 "Louis Agassiz, his Life and Correspondence." (The Andover Review, 
January, 1886, p. 39.) 
his conception of " species," he sententiously replied : " A 
species is a thought of the Creator." To this thoroughly theistic 
conception he joined the scientific deduction which he had 
already been led to draw, that the animal species of each 
geological age, or even stratum, were different from those preceding 
and following, and also unconnected by natural derivation. 
And his very last published works reiterated his steadfast 
conviction that " there is no evidence of a direct descent 
of later from earlier species in the geological succession of animals." 
Indeed, so far as we know, he would not even admit 
that such " thoughts of the Creator " as these might have been 
actualized in the natural course of events. If he had accepted 
such a view, and if he had himself apprehended and 
developed in his own way the now wellnigh assured significance 
of some of his early and pregnant generalizations, the 
history of the doctrine of development would have been different 
from what it is, a different spirit and another name would 
have been prominent in it, and Agassiz would not have passed 
away while fighting what he felt to be —at least for the 
present — a losing battle. It is possible that the " whirligig 
of time" may still "bring in his revenges," but not very 
probable. 
Much to his credit, it may be said that a good share of 
Agassiz's invincible aversion to evolution may be traced to 
the spirit in which it was taken up by his early associate Vogt, 
and, indeed, by most of the German school then and since, 
which justly offended both his scientific and his religious 
sense. Agassiz always " thought nobly of the soul," and 
could in no way approve either materialistic or agnostic opinions. 
The idealistic turn of his mind was doubtless confirmed 
in his student clays at Munich, whither he and his friend 
Braun resorted after one session at Heidelberg, and where 
both devotedly attended the lectures of Schelling, — then in 
his later glory, — and of Oken, whose " Natur-Philosophie " 
was then in the ascendant. Although fascinated and inspired 
by Oken's a priori biology (built upon morphological ideas 
which had not yet been established but had, in part, been 
rightly divined), the two young naturalists were not carried 
away by it, — probably because they were such keen and conscientious 
observers, and were kept in close communion with 
work-a-day Nature. As Agassiz intimates, they had to resist 
" the temptation to impose one's own ideas upon Nature, to 
explain her mysteries by brilliant theories rather than by 
patient study of the facts as we find them," and that " overbearing 
confidence in the abstract conceptions of the human 
mind as applied to the study of nature ; " although, indeed, he 
adds, " the young naturalist of that day who did not share, in 
some degree, the intellectual stimulus given to scientific pursuits 
by physio-philosophy would have missed a part of his 
training." That training was not lost upon Agassiz. Although 
the adage in his last published article, " A physical fact is as 
sacred as a moral principle," was well lived up to, yet ideal 
prepossessions often had much to do with his marshaling of 
the facts. 
Another professor at Munich, from whom Agassiz learned 
much, and had nothing to unlearn, waas the anatomist and 
physiologist Dollinger. He published little ; but he seems to 
have been the founder of modern embryological investigation, 
and to have initiated his two famous pupils, first Von Baer, 
and then Agassiz, into at least the rudiments of the doctrine 
of the correspondence between the stages of the development 
of the individual animal with that of its rank in the scale of 
being, and the succession in geological time of the forms and 
types to which the species belongs : a principle very fertile 
• for scientific zoology in the hands of both these naturalists, 
and one of the foundations of that theory of evolution which 
the former, we believe, partially accepted, and the other wholly 
rejected. 
The botanical professor, the genial Von Martius, should 
also be mentioned here. He found Agassiz a student, barely 
of age ; he directly made him an author, and an authority in 
the subject of his predilection. Dr. Spix, the zoological companion 
of Martius in Brazilian exploration, died in 1826 ; the 
fishes of the collection were left untouched. Martius recognized 
the genius of Agassiz, and offered him, and indeed 
pressed him to undertake their elaboration. Agassiz brought 
out the first part of the quarto volume on the Fishes of the 
Brazilian Expedition of Spix and Martius before he took 
his degree of Doctor of Philosophy, and completed it before 
he proceeded to that of Doctor in Medicine in 1830. The 
work opened his way to fame, but brought no money. Still, 
as Martius defrayed all the expenses, the net result compared 
quite favorably with that of later publications. Moreover, 
out of it possibly issued his own voyage to Brazil in 
later years, under auspices such as his early patron never 
dreamed of. 
This early work also made him known to Cuvier ; so that 
when he went to Paris, a year afterwards, to continue his 
medical and scientific studies, — the one, as he deemed, from 
necessity, the other from choice, — he was received as a fellowsavant. 
Yet at first with a certain reserve, probably no more 
than was natural in view of the relative age and position of 
the two men ; but Agassiz, writing to his sister, says: "This 
extreme but formal politeness chills you instead of putting 
you at your ease ; it lacks cordiality, and to tell the truth, I 
would gladly go away if I were not held fast by the wealth of 
material of which I can avail myself." But only a month 
later he writes — this time to his uncle — that, while he was 
anxious lest he " might not be allowed to examine, and still 
less to describe, the fossil fishes and their skeletons in the 
Museum, ... knowing that Cuvier intended to write a work 
on this subject," and might naturally wish to reserve the materials 
for his own use, and when the young naturalist, as he 
showed his own sketches and notes to the veteran, was faintly 
venturing to hope that, on seeing his work so far advanced, 
he might perhaps be invited to share in a joint publication, 
Cuvier relieved his anxiety and more than fulfilled bis halfformed 
desires. 
" He desired his secretary to bring him a certain portfolio of 
drawings. He showed me the contents : they were drawings 
of fossil fishes, and notes which he had taken in the British 
Museum and elsewhere. After looking it through with me, 
he said he had seen with satisfaction the manner in which I 
had treated this subject ; that I had, indeed, anticipated him, 
since he had intended at some future time to do the same 
thing ; but that, as I had given it so much attention, and had 
done my work so well, he had decided to renounce his project, 
and to place at my disposition all the materials he had collected 
and all the preliminary notes he had taken." 
Within three months Cuvier fell under a stroke of paralysis, 
and shortly died. The day before the attack he had said to 
Agassiz, "Be careful, and remember that work kills." We 
doubt if it often kills naturalists, unless when, like Cuvier, 
they also become statesmen. 
But to live and work, the naturalist must be fed. It was a 
perplexing problem how possibly to remain a while longer in 
Paris, which was essential to the carrying on of his work, and 
to find the means of supplying his very simple wants. And 
here the most charming letters in these volumes are, first, the 
one from his mother, full of tender thoughtfulness, and making 
the first suggestion about Neuchatel and its museum, as a 
place where the aspiring naturalist might secure something 
more substantial than " brilliant hopes " to live upon ; next, 
that from Agassiz to his father, who begs to be told as much 
as he can be supposed to understand of the nature of this 
work upon fossil fishes, which called for so much time, labor, 
and expense ; and, almost immediately, Agassiz's letter to his 
parents, telling them that Humboldt had, quite spontaneously 
and unexpectedly, relieved his present anxieties by a credit of 
a thousand francs, to be increased, if necessary. Humboldt 
had shown a friendly interest in him from the first, and had 
undertaken to negotiate with Cotta, the publisher, in his behalf 
; but, becoming uneasy by the delay, and feeling that " a 
man so laborious, so gifted, and so deserving of affection . . . 
should not be left in a position where lack of serenity disturbs 
his power of work," he delicately pressed the acceptance of 
this aid as a confidential transaction between two friends of 
unequal age. 
Indeed, the relations between the "two friends," one at 
that time sixty-three, and the other twenty-five, were very 
beautiful, and so continued, as the correspondence shows. 
Humboldt's letters (we wish there were more of them) are 
particularly delightful, are full of wit and wisdom, of almost 
paternal solicitude, and of excellent counsel. He enjoins 
upon Agassiz to finish what he has in hand before taking up 
new tasks (this is in 1837), not to spread his intellect over 
too many subjects at once, nor to go on enlarging the works 
he had undertaken ; he predicts the pecuniary difficulties in 
which expansion would be sure to land him, bewails the glacier 
investigations, and closes with " a touch of fun, in order 
that my letter may seem a little less like preaching. A thousand 
affectionate remembrances. No more ice, not much of 
echinoderms, plenty of fish, recall of ambassadors in partibus, 
and great severity toward booksellers, an infernal race, two 
or three of which have been killed under me." 
The ambassadors in partibus were the artists Agassiz employed 
and sent to England or elsewhere to draw fossil fishes 
for him in various museums, at a cost which Humboldt knew 
would be embarrassing. The ice, which he would have no 
more of, refers to the glacier researches upon which Agassiz 
was entering with ardor, laying one of the solid foundations 
of his fame. Curiously enough, both Humboldt and Von 
Buch, with all their interest in Agassiz, were quite unable to 
comprehend the importance of an inquiry which was directly 
in their line, and, indeed, they scorned it ; while the young 
naturalist, without training in physics or geology, but with 
the insight of genius, at once developed the whole idea of the 
glacial period, with its wonderful consequences, upon his first 
inspection of the phenomena shown him by Charpentier in 
the valley of the Rhone. 
It is well that Humboldt's advice was not heeded in this 
regard. Nevertheless, he was a wise counselor. He saw the 
danger into which his young friend's enthusiasm and boundless 
appetite for work was likely to lead him. For of Agassiz 
it may be said, with a variation of the well-known adage, that 
there was nothing he touched that he did not aggrandize. 
Everything he laid hold of grew large under his hand, — 
grew into a mountain threatening to overwhelm him, and 
would have overwhelmed any one whose powers were not proportionate 
to his aspirations. Established at Neuchatel, and 
giving himself with ardor to the duties of his professorship, 
it was surely enough if he could do the author's share in the 
production of his great works on the fossil and the freshwater 
fishes, without assuming the responsibilities and cares 
of publication as well, and even of a lithographic establishment 
which he set up mainly for his own use. But he carried 
on, pari passu, or nearly so, his work on fossil Mollusca, — 
a quarto volume with nearly a hundred plates, — his monoo-raphs 
of Eehinoderms, living and fossil, his investigations of 
the embryological development of fishes, and that laborious 
work, the " Nomenclator Zoijlogicus," with the " Bibliographia," 
later published in England by the Ray Society. 
Moreover, of scattered papers, those of the Royal Society's 
Catalogue which antedate his arrival in this country are more 
than threescore and ten. He had help, indeed ; but the more 
he had the more he enlarged and diversified his tasks, Humboldt's 
sound advice about his zoological undertakings being 
no more heeded than his fulminations against the glacial 
theory. 
In the midst of all this, Agassiz turned his glance upon the 
glaciers, and the " local phenomenon " became at once a cosmic 
one. So far a happy divination ; but he seems to have 
believed quite to the last that not only the temperate zones, 
but whole intertropical continents — at least the American — 
had been sheeted with ice. The narrative in the first volume 
will give the general reader a vivid but insufficient conception 
of the stupendous work upon which he so brilliantly labored 
for nearly a decade of years. 
Caelum non animum. mutant who come with such a spirit 
to a wider and, scientifically, less developed continent. First 
as visitor, soon as denizen, and at length as citizen of the 
American republic, Agassiz rose with every occasion to larger 
and more various activities. What with the Lowell Institute, 
the college in Charleston, South Carolina, and Cornell University, 
in addition to Harvard, he may be said to have held 
three or four professorships at once, none of them sinecures. 
He had not been two months in the country before a staff of 
assistants was gathered around him and a marine zoological 
laboratory was in operation. The rude shed on the shore and 
the small wooden building at Cambridge developed under his 
hand into the Museum of Zoology, — if not as we see it now, 
yet into one of the foremost collections. Who can say what 
it would have been if his plans and ideas had obtained full 
recognition, and " expenditure " had seemed to the trustees, 
as it seemed to him, " the best investment," or if efficient filial 
aid, not then to be dreamed of, had not given solid realization 
to the high paternal aspirations ! In like manner grew large 
under his hand the Brazilian exploration so generously provided 
for by a Boston citizen and fostered by an enlightened 
emperor ; and on a similar scale was planned, and partly carried 
out, the "Contributions to the Natural History of the 
United States," as the imperial quarto work was modestly entitled, 
which was to be published " at the rate of one volume 
a year, each volume to contain about three hundred pages and 
twenty plates," with simple reliance upon a popular subscription 
; — and so, indeed, of everything which this large-minded 
man undertook. 
While Agassiz thus was a magnanimous man, in the literal 
as well as the accepted meaning of the word, he was also, as 
we have seen, a truly fortunate one. Honorable assistance 
came to him at critical moments, such as the delicate gift 
from Humboldt at Paris, which perhaps saved him to science ; 
such as the Wollaston prize from the Geological Society in 
1834, when he was struggling for the means of carrying on 
the Fossil Fishes. The remainder of the deficit of this undertaking 
he was able to make up from his earliest earnings in 
America. For the rest, we all know how almost everything 
he desired — and he wanted nothing except for science — was 
cheerfully supplied to his hand by admiring givers. Those 
who knew the man during the twenty-seven years of his 
American life can quite understand the contagious enthusiasm 
and confidence which he evoked. The impression will in 
some degree be transmitted by these pleasant and timely volumes, 
which should, make the leading lines of the life of 
Agassiz clear to the newer generation, and deepen them in 
the memory of an older one. 
EDWARD TUCKERMAN. 
On the 15th of March last, the Academy lost one of the 
older and more distinguished members of the botanical section, 
the lichenologist, Edward Tuckerman. 
He was born in Boston, December 7, 1817, was the eldest 
son of a Boston merchant of the same name and of Sophia 
(May) Tuckerman. He was prepared for college at the Boston 
Latin School, whence, in obedience to his father's choice 
rather than of his own, he went to Union College at Schenectady. 
Entering as a sophomore, he took his B. A. degree in 
1837. He then entered the Harvard Law School, took his 
degree in 1839, and remained in residence in Cambridge for 
a year or two longer. In the year 1841 he went to Germany 
and Scandinavia, going as far north as Upsala, devoting himself, 
as in a subsequent visit, to philosophical, historical, and 
botanical studies. On his return, in September, 1842, he 
made, with the writer of this notice, a botanical excursion to 
the White Mountains of New Hampshire, with which he was 
already familiar. At the close of that or early in the following 
year he took up his residence at Union College, proceeded to 
the M. A. degree, and there prepared and privately published 
one of the smaller, but noteworthy, of his botanical papers. 
In the year 1844 or 1845 he returned to Cambridge, and 
in the autumn of 1846, in his twenty-ninth year, he became 
again an undergraduate. Applying for admission to the incoming 
senior class, he remarked to President Quincy that 
his father had broken the family tradition by sending him to 
another college, and that he proposed to correct the mistake. 
To the suggestion, that, being already an alumnus of the Law 
School as well as of Union, the University would willingly 
concede to him the earlier degrees he sought, he replied that 
1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, new 
ser. xiii., 539. (1886.) 
he proposed to receive them in the ordinary way. He accordingly 
passed the" regular examinations, took the whole routine 
of the studies of his class, and so was graduated with distinction 
in the class of 1847, — a unique but characteristic illustration 
of a loyal spirit, becoming " small by degrees and 
beautifully less." 
His passion for university study was not yet quite satiated. 
For, two or three years later, he entered the Harvard Divinity 
School, passed through its course of study and prescribed 
exercises, — among them the delivery of a sermon in one of 
the Cambridge churches, — and so, in the year 1852, he became 
for the third time an alumnus of Harvard. 
In May, 1854, he married in Boston Sarah Eliza Sigourney 
dishing, who survives him, without offspring. Removing 
that year to Amherst, he built with excellent taste, upon a 
beautiful site, the house which has ever since been their 
abode. Although mainly devoted to botanical investigations, 
his first official connection with Amherst College was that of 
lecturer in history, then that of professor of oriental history, 
down to the year 1858, when he was collated to the chair 
of botany, which he held to the end of his life, although of 
late years relieved from the duty of class instruction. The 
college did itself the honor to confer upon its professor the 
degree of LL. D. 
We cannot say when or how Professor Tuckerman became 
a botanist. But at an early period he was intimate with Dr. 
Harris, then University librarian, and with the ardent William 
Oakes of Ipswich, upon whom, through Dr. Osgood of 
Danvers, descended the mantle of Manasseh Cutler, of Essex 
County, the earliest New England botanist. 
He must have been attracted to the Lichens almost from 
the beginning ; for his first publications were upon Lichens 
of New England, largely those of his own collecting in the 
White and Green Mountains, in two papers, one communicated 
to the Boston Natural History Society, in 1838 or 1839, 
the other in 1840. These were soon followed by papers on 
Phaenogamous botany, namely : one "On Oakesia a new 
Genus of the Order Empetreae," a contribution made while 
he was abroad, in the summer of 1842, to Hooker's " London 
Journal of Botany." Unfortunately, the interesting plant 
which he thus dedicated to his botanical associate, William 
Oakes, who well deserved such commemoration, proved to be 
a second species of Corema. In 1843, at Schenectady, he 
privately printed and issued his " Enumeratio Methodica Caricum 
quarundam " (pp. 21, 8vo), in which he displayed not 
only his critical knowledge of the large and difficult genus 
Carex, but also his genius as a systematize]' ; for this essay 
was the first considerable, and a really successful, attempt to 
combine the species of this genus into natural groups. It is 
wholly in Latin, which he much affected for scientific disquisition 
as well as for technical characters, and used with facility 
and elegance. In the same year also appeared, in the American 
Journal of Science, the first of his " Observations on some 
interesting Plants of New England." This was followed in 
1848 by a second, and in 1849 by a third paper in the same 
Journal ; these containing, inter alia, his elaboration of our 
species of Potamogeton, then for the first time critically 
studied. These papers — with one or two in Hovey's Magazine 
and elsewhere, at about the same date — may be said to 
have ended his work in Phaenogamous botany, although his 
interest in the subject never died out ; for when he accepted 
the chair of botany at Amherst he began the preparation of 
" A Catalogue of Plants growing without cultivation within 
thirty miles of Amherst College," which he published in the 
year 1875, the late Mr. Charles Frost of Brattleborough contributing 
the lower Cryptogamia other than the Lichens. In 
matter and form, as well as in typography (in which Professor 
Tuckerman had exquisite taste), this catalogue is one of 
the very best. 
But it was to Lichenology that his strength, as indeed al- 
most his whole life, was most assiduously devoted. When, 
in his youth, the active members of the newly organized 
Natural History Society of Boston divided among themselves 
the work of making better known the animals, plants, and 
minerals of Massachusetts, the study of the Lichens either 
was assigned to him or he volunteered to undertake it. From 
this came those earliest papers which have already been mentioned. 
Also his " Synopsis of the Lichens of New -England, 
the other Northern States, and British America," communicated 
to this Academy in the autumn of 1847, which is the 
most considerable botanical contribution to the first volume of 
the Proceedings. The fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh volumes 
contain other of his Lichenological papers, of wholly 
original matter and critical character, — largely upon collections 
which had begun to come to him from the Rocky Mountain 
region, from Texas, the Pacific coast, the Sandwich Islands, 
and especially from the rich materials gathered in Cuba 
and elsewhere by the late Charles Wright. In these years, 
too, he much helped the study of his favorite plants by the 
preparation and issue of his " Lichenes Americae Septentrionalis 
Exsiccati," in six fasciculi, or three volumes, highly 
valued by those who fortunately possess them. Equally fortunate 
are the herbaria which possess the " Lichenes Caroli 
Wrightii Cubse curante E. Tuckerman," which authenticate 
his thorough work upon that portion of Mr. Wright's Cuban 
collections that he undertook to elaborate. 
Passing without notice various subsidiary contributions 
both to journals and to the reports of exploring expeditions, 
we come to a pamphlet which he independently published at 
Amherst, in 1866, entitled " Lichens of California, Oregon, 
and the Rocky Mountains, so far as yet known," which, small 
though it be (pp. 35, 8vo), is particularly noteworthy ; for 
in this he lays down the principles and matured opinions 
which he had adopted, and which he firmly adhered to, for 
the taxonomy and classification of Lichens. These are fully 
exemplified in the two systematic works to which Professor 
Tuckerman's later years and maturest powers were persistently 
devoted, — works which, partly from their publication 
somewhat out of the ordinary channels, are by no means so 
well known as they should be, but which surely secure to their 
author the position of a master in his department, — in which, 
indeed, we suppose he has left behind him no superior. 
These works are, first, the " Genera Lichenum, an Arrangement 
of the North American Lichens " (pp. 283, 8vo), pub- 
lished at Amherst in the year 1872 ; second, the " Synopsis 
of the North American Lichens," Part I, comprising the 
Parmeliacei, Cladoniei, and Caznogoniei, published in Boston 
in 1882. It is hoped, but it is not yet certain, that some 
portions of the remainder, relating to the less conspicuous 
but more difficult tribes, may have been substantially made 
ready for the printer. The loss, we fear, is irreparable ; for 
the work cannot be completed by other hands upon quite 
the same lines, nor in our day with the same knowledge and 
insight ; and Professor Tuckerman's mode of exposition is 
inimitable. 
That which Professor Tuckerman did accomplish, however 
suffices to show the wide reach and remarkable precision of 
his knowledge, his patience and thoroughness in investigation, 
his sagacity in detecting affinities, and his philosophical and 
rather peculiar turn of mind. He wrote in a style which — 
though perhaps founded on that of his botanical model, Fries, 
for succinctness, and that of his favorite German philosophical 
masters for involution — was yet all his own, and which 
was the more pronounced in advancing years, when, owing to 
increasing deafness and delicate health, he led a more secluded 
life. In disquisition, the long and comprehensive sentences 
which he so carefully constructs are unmistakably clear to 
those who will patiently plod their way through them, and 
his choice even of unusual words is generally felicitous ; but 
sometimes the statements are so hedged about and interpenetrated 
by qualifications or reservations, and so pregnant with 
subsidiary although relevant considerations, that they are far 
from easy reading. Like nests of pill-boxes, they are packed 
into least bulk ; but for practical use they need to be taken 
apart. 
That Professor Tuckerman could write idiomatic and clearflowing 
English upon occasion, the delightful introduction to 
his edition of Josselyn's " New England's Rarities " demonstrates 
; and in the framing of botanical descriptive phrases, 
Latin or English, in which clearness and brevity with just 
order and proportion are desiderata, he had hardly a superior. 
As has been said, his botanical model was Elias Fries. He 
had visited him at Upsala, and he kept up a correspondence 
with him to the end of the venerable botanist's life. He caught 
from Fries, or he developed independently, and cultivated to 
perfection, that sense of the value of the indefinable something 
which botanists inadequately express by the term " habit," 
which often enables the systernatist to divine much further than 
he can perceive in the tracing of relationships. Upon this, in 
direct reference to Fries, and with a use of the term that seems 
to correlate it with "insight," Tuckerman remarks : "So great 
is the value of Habit in minds fully qualified to apprehend and 
appreciate its subtleties, that such minds may not only anticipate 
what the microscope is to reveal, but help us to understand 
its revelations." It should be remembered, however, 
that when Fries did the best of his work there were no microscopes 
of much account ; and it is probable that Tuckerman 
would have done more, and perhaps have reached some different 
conclusions, if he had earlier and more largely used the 
best instrumental appliances of the time. One advantage, however, 
of his way of study, and his philosophical conception of 
an ideal connection of forms which are capable of a wide play 
of variation, was that he took broad views of genera and species. 
So he was quite unlike that numerous race of specialists 
who, in place of characterizing species, describe specimens, 
and to whom " genus " means the lowest recognizable group 
of species. 
As to the vexed question in Lichenology, which came to 
him rather late and seemed to threaten the stability of his 
work, it was most natural that, at his time of life, he did not 
take kindly to the Algo-fungal notion of Lichens, and that he 
was convinced of its falsity by questionable evidence. 
Professor Tuckerman was much more than an excellent specialist. 
Happily, he did not become such until he had laid a 
good foundation, for the time, in general systematic botany ; 
and his early studies show that he was a man of scholarly culture 
over an unusually wide range. He was at home in the 
leading modern languages ; he wrote Latin with reasonable 
facility, and botanical Latin remarkably well ; he had given 
serious attention to law, divinity, philosophy, and history ; and 
he was fond of antiquarian and genealogical researches. He 
privately published (without date) a handsome edition of Josselyn's 
"New England's Rarities Discovered," with copious critical 
annotations, of 134 pages, including an introduction of 27 
paces, which contains a biography of Josselyn and a sketch of 
the earlier sources of our knowledge of New England plants 
and of some of the people who made them known. 1 Among 
them is a biographical notice of Manasseh Cutler, one of the 
very first elected Fellows of this Academy, the earliest botanical 
contributor to its Memoirs, — pastor, naturalist, and 
statesman, the builder of New England in Ohio, probably the 
originator of the Dane Resolutions in Congress, —a man 
whose name deserves larger remembrance than it has yet received. 

Professor Tuckerman was elected into this Academy in May, 
1845. He was one of the corporate members of the National 
Academy of Sciences at Washington, and an honorary member 
of several of the learned societies and academies of Europe. 
He was still young when Nuttall dedicated to him the genus 
Tuckermania, founded upon one of the handsomer of the 
Californian Compositce, which is retained as a subgenus. For 
one who did not attain the age of sixty-seven, his publications 
span a remarkably wide interval. It is said that he contributed 
several short articles on antiquarian topics to the " Mercantile 
Journal," in the year 1832 ; also that, in 1832 and 
1833, he assisted the late Mr. Samuel G. Drake in the preparation 
of his " Book of the Indians " and " Indian Wars." 
Then, between 1834 and 1841, he contributed to the " New 
York Churchman " no less than fifty-four articles, under the 
title of "Notitia Literaria " and " Adversaria," upon points in 
history, biography, and theology. His latest botanical article 
was contributed to the " Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical 
Club " in 1884. A little later, possibly, are some of his contributions 
to the "Church Eclectic," mostly pseudonymous, 
— critical notices of recent theological works. He was a 
keen critic, and very independent in his judgments. He had 
1 It appears that this was a contribution to the fourth volume of the 
" Archasologia Americana," published in 1860. 
sounded in his time the depths of various opinions. But as he 
was born into, so he died, as he had lived, devoutly, in the 
communion of the Protestant Episcopal Church. With some 
interruptions, and of late under increasing infirmities, he yet 
continued his Lichenological studies until within a few weeks 
before the end. Living for a long while in comparative seclusion, 
few of our younger botanists can have known him personally, 
or much by correspondence ; and most of his old associates 
and near friends, who knew him best and prized him 
highly for his sterling character, have gone before him. 
INDEX. 
— * — 
Aconitum reclinatum, 57. 
Aconitum uncinatum, 27. 
Adansonia digitata, 118. 
and its terminology, 181. 
Estivation, definition of, 181 ; tenni- 
Banks, Sir Joseph, herbarium of, 10. 
Banyan-tree, mode of growth of, 81. 
Baobab-tree, 118. 
Bartram, William, his journey to the 
Alleghany Mountains, 22. 
nology of, 183 ; history of, 184. 
Estivation, quincuncial, 187. 
Agassiz, Louis, sketch of, 483. 
Age of trees, the manner of determin- 
Bee, Wyman's Notes on the Cells of 
the, 394. 
Bentham, George, herbarium of, 12 ; 
sketch of, 451. 
Berlin, royal herbarium at, 19. 
Bigelow, Jacob, sketch of, 413. 
Birthplace of existing floras, 229. 
Boissier, Edmond, sketch of, 479. 
Boott, Francis, sketch of, 315. 
Botanic Garden, the Elgin (note), 247. 
Botatiical excursion to the mountains 
ing, discussed, 84. 
Alchemilla alpina, 247. 
Alleghany Mountains, flora of, 276. 
America, plants of North, common to 
eastern Asia (Table), 165. 
American and Asiatic plants contrasted 
(Table), 165. 
American climate described, 208. 
American (Pacific North) plants common 
to eastern Asia (Table), 174. 
American (North) plants common to 
of North Carolina, 22. 
Boykinia aconitifolia., 42. 
Brasenia peltata, 141, 173. 
Braun, Alexander, sketch of, 403. 
British Museum, herbarium of, 9. 
Brown and Humboldt, sketch of, 283. 
Europe, 171. 
American vegetation, aspects of, 143. 
Amianthium musccetoxicum, 49. 
Amphicarpcza, 50. 
Apios tuberosa, 201. 
California forests, composition of, 151. 
California, weeds of, 241. 
Arboretum Britannieum, account of 
the, 77. 
Cardamine rotundifolia, 52. 
Carex aestivalis, 50. 
Archaeology and forest-geography, 204. 
Arcueil, Socie'te' d', 302. 
Carex Frankii, 36. 
Carex Fraseriana, 54. 
Carex gracillima, 51. 
Carex Stenolepsis, 36. 
Carex Sullivantii, 51. 
Arnott, Dr., herbarium of, 14. 
Asarum, 40. 
Asia, extra European plants of eastern, 
found in North America (Table), 
165. 
Castagno di cento cavalli, 92 
Caulophyllum, 154. 
Asia, extra European plants of eastern, 
found in Pacific North America 
(Table), 170. 
Cedar of Lebanon, 100. 
Characteristics of the North American 
Flora, 260. 
Astilbe decandra, 61. 
Azalea calendulacea, 47. 
Chelone Lyoni, 56. 
Chestnut-tree of Tortworth Court, 94. 
Cladrastis, 154. 
Clethra acuminata, 43. 
Climates of North America, described, 
20S. 
Climatic influence on selection of 
plants, 223. 
Clinton, George W., sketch of, 475. 
Close-breeding, effects of, 179. 
Colden, Governor, of New York, 5. 
Collinson, Peter, 7. 
Coptis, 6. 
Correa de Serra, Joseph, sketch of, 301. 
Cretaceous forests, 162. 
Croom, H. B , sketch of, 195. 
Croomia pauciflora, 192. 
Cupressus sempervirens, 99. 
Curtis' explorations of the Alleghany 
Mountains, 34. 
Curtis, Moses Ashley, sketch of, 351. 
Cuvier, sketch of, by De Candolle, 297. 
Cypress at Somma, 100. 
Cypress of Montezuma, 113. 
Cypress of Puebela, 113. 
Cypress of Santa Maria del Tule, 114. 
Cypress, the deciduous, 112. 
Darwin, Charles, sketch of, 419. 
Decaisne, Joseph, sketch of, 431. 
De Candolle, A. P., sketch of, 289. 
De Candolle, herbarium of, 17. 
De Candolle's views on longevity of 
trees, 83. 
Dewey, Chester, sketch of, 345. 
Diphylleia cymosa, 44. 
Distribution of forests, 207. 
Distribution of species discussed, 133. 
138. 
Do varieties wear out or tend to wear 
out ? 174. 
Douglas, David, travels in North 
America, 109. 
Douglas Spruce, the, 108. 
Draccena Draco, 123. 
Dragon-tree of Orotava, 123. 
Echium. vulgare naturalized in Vir- 
ginia, 35. 
Elliottia, 155. 
Elm, the Washington, 86. 
Elm-trees, various old, 86. 
Engelmann, G-, sketch of, 439. 
Etna, the chestnut of Mt., 92. 
European herbaria, 1. 
European plants common to North 
America, 171. 
European plants naturalized in eastern 
America (Table), 239. 
Features of North American vegetation, 
261. 
Fendler, Augustus, sketch of, 465. 
Fibraurea, 5. 
Flora, characteristics of the North 
American, 260. 
Flora of the Alleghany Mountains, 276. 
Flora of the great plains, 277. 
Flora of Japan and North America 
contrasted, 125. 
Flora of Michaux, the, 244. 
Flora of North America, the, 243. 
Flora of Japan, the, 125. 
Flora of the New Jersey Pine Barrens, 
275. 
Flora of Pursh, the, 245. 
Flora of the Rocky Mountains, 277 
Flora of Torrey and Gray, the, 249. 
Floras, birthplaces of existing, 229. 
Floras of Japan and North America 
contrasted with that of Europe, 129. 
Floras of Japan and North America 
compared, 152. 
Forest geography and archaeology, 204. 
Forests, arctic tertiary, 160. 
Forests, aspects of North American, 
204. 
Forests, cretaceous, 162. 
Forests, distribution of, 207. 
Forests of America, Europe, and east- 
ern Asia contrasted, 218. 
Forests of Atlantic and Pacific North 
America contrasted, 216. 
Forests of California, composition of, 
151. 
Forests of the Sierra Nevada, 212. 
Fountains' Abbey, ancient yew-trees 
of, 104. 
Fraser, John, his travels in North 
America, 31. 
Freiburg, the great Linden of, 90. 
Fries, Elias Magnus, sketch of, 411. 
Garden, Dr. John, 8. 
Gender of names of varieties, 257. 
Geography, forest, and archaeology, 204. 
Geum geniculatum, 58. 
Ginseng, 155. 
Glacial period, effects on vegetation, 
156. 
Glyptostrobus, fossil, 160. 
Greene, Benjamin D., sketch of, 310. 
Greenland, tertiary vegetation of, 227. 
Hanbury, Daniel, sketch of, 401. 
Harvey, William Henry, sketch of, 337. 
Hedyotis purpurea, 49. 
Heer, Oswald, sketch of, 447. 
Helianthus annuus, 203. 
Helianthus doronicoides, 197. 
Helianthus lenticularis, 203. 
Helianthus petiolaris, 203. 
Helianthus tuberosus, notes on, 197. 
Herbaria, European, 1. 
Herbaria, of Banks, 10 ; of Bentham, 
12 ; of De Candolle, 17 ; of Hooker, 
12 ; of Kunth, 20 ; of Lambert, 12 ; 
of Lindley, 13 ; of Linnaeus, 2, 4 ; 
of Michaux, 16 ; of the British Museum, 
9. 
Heuchera caulescens, 37 ; 11. hispida, 
38 ; II villosa, 37. 
Holosteum succulentum, 5. 
Hooker, W. J., herbarium of, 12 
sketch of, 321. 
Houstonia serpyllifolia, 40. 
Humboldt and Brown, sketch of, 283. 
Hydrangea, 154. 
Infusoria, Wyman's experiments on 
the formation of, 395. 
James, Thomas Potts, sketch of, 433. 
Japan, the flora of, 125. 
Jardin des Plantes, account of, 14. 
Jeffersonia, 154. 
Jerusalem Artichoke, Canadian origin 
of, discussed, 200 ; note on, 197. 
Juniperus Virginiana, 220. 
Kalm's visit to North America, 4. 
Kin's travels in North America, 33. 
Kunth. herbarium of, 20. 
Lambert, A. 8., herbarium of, 12. 
Lebanon, Cedar of, 100. 
Leiophyllum, 59. 
Lespedeza striata, 236. 
Libocedrus, 161. 
Ligusticum actcei/olium, 47. 
Linden-tree of Freiburg, 89 ; of Neustadt, 
90. 
Lindley, herbarium of, 12 ; sketch of, 
333. 
Linnaeus' herbarium transferred to 
England, 2. 
Lister a convallarioides, 41. 
Live Oak, the, 98. 
Longevity of trees, 71 ; De Candolle's 
views on, 83. 
Los Cupressos de la Reyna Sultana, 99. 
Loudon, J. C., sketch of, 76. 
Lowell, John Amory, sketch of, 435. 
Magnolia Fraseri, 40. 
Maple, the sycamore, of Trons, 89. 
Medicago denticulata, 234. 
Melissa Nepeta, 38. 
Michaux, A., flora of, 244 ; herbarium 
of, 16 ; travels in North America, 
23, 73. 
Michaux, F. A., North American sylva, 
71 ; travels in North America, 32. 
Mirbel, C. F. , De Candolle's opinion 
of, 294. 
Mitchell, Dr. John, 6. 
Mitchella repens, 6. 
Mohl, Hugo von, sketch of, 354. 
Monsters, development of double, 393. 
Montezuma, the Cypress of, 113. 
Munich, herbarium at, 18. 
Names of varieties, gender of, 257. 
Neustadt, the Linden of, 90. 
New Jersey Pine-Barrens, flora of, 275. 
North America, the flora of, 243. 
North American flora, characteristics 
of the, 260. 
North Carolina, notes of a botanical 
excursion to the mountains of, 22. 
Notes on the history of Helianthus tuberosus, 
197. 
Nuttall's North American sylva, 75 ; 
travels in North America, 33, 75. 
Oak, the Live, 98. 
Oak, the Wadsworth, 97. 
Oak-tree, the, near Saintes, 96. 
Oak-trees, remarkable, 94. 
Olive-tree of Pescio, 98. 
Onoclea sensibilis, genealogy of, 162. 
Origin of Sequoias discussed, 144. 
Origin of species discussed, 134, 172, 
225. 
Origin of the prairies discussed, 214. 
Orotava, Dragon-tree of, 123. 
Pampas, absence of trees from the, discussed, 
263. 
Pertinacity and predominance of 
weeds, 234. 
Peseio, Olive-tree of, 99. 
Phlox Carolina, 50. 
Pickering, Charles, sketch of, 406. 
Pilgrimage to Torreya, 189. 
Pine, the White, 107. 
Pine-Barrens of New Jersey, flora of, 
275. 
Pinus Lambertiana, 108. 
Plains, flora of the great, 277. 
Plane-tree, large specimens of the, 91. 
Plantago cucullata, 247. 
Plants common to eastern America 
and eastern Asia, 269. 
Plants common to eastern Asia and 
North America (Table), 165. 
Plants common to east Asia and Pacific 
North America (Table), 170. 
Plants common to Europe and North 
America, 171. 
Plants, European, naturalized in eastern 
America (Table), 239. 
Plants of America absent from Europe ; 
268. 
Plants selected by climatic influence. 
223. 
Podophyllum, 154. 
Polygonella parvifolia, 25. 
Populus tremuloides, 220. 
Prairies, origin of, discussed, 214. 
Predominance and pertinacity of 
weeds, 234. 
Puebela, the Cypress of, 113. 
Pursh, the flora of, 245 ; sketch of, 
245 ; travels in North America, 32. 
Pycnanthemum, remarks on, 67. 
Pyrularia oleifera, 44. 
Baia Batis, Wyman's investigation of 
the development of, 391. 
Bana pipiens, Wyman's paper on, 389. 
Bhododendron Catawbiense, discovery 
of, 31. 
Bhus toxicodendron, 154. 
Rhus venenata, 154. 
Koan Mountain, plants on the summit 
of, 64. 
Rocky Mountains, flora of, 277. 
Rceper, Johannes August Christian, 
sketch of, 452. 
Rumford, sketch of, by De Candolle, 
297. 
Santa Maria del Tule, the Cypress of, 
114. 
Sartwell, Henry P., sketch of, 343. 
Saxifraga Careyana, 55. 
Scutellaria Guilielmi, 168. 
Scutellaria serrata, 40. 
Sedum pusillum, habitat of, 29. 
Sequoia and its history, 142. 
Sequoia, fossil, 159. 
Sequoia Longsdorfli, 159. 
Sequoia Sternbergii, 159. 
Sequoias, origin of, discussed, 144. 
Short, Charles Wilkins, sketch of, 312. 
Shortia galacifolia, 69. 
Sierra Nevada forests, 212. 
Smith's, Sir James E., herbarium, 9; 
purchase of Linnaeus' herbarium, 2. 
Soeiete" d'Arcueil, 302. 
Solidago glomerata, 57. 
Somma, the great Cypress of, 100. 
Species, distribution of, discussed, 133, 
138 ; number of, in the North American 
Floras, 252 ; origin of, discussed, 
134, 172, 225. 
Spruce, the Douglas, 108. 
Sullivant, Wm. Sterling, sketch of, 376. 
Sullivantia Ohionis, 43. 
Sylva of North America, Michaux's, 
71 ; Nuttall's, 75. 
Taxodium distichum, 112. 
Taxodium, fossil, 159. 
Terminology of aestivation, 181. 
Tertiary arctic forests, 160; vegetation 
of Greenland, 227. 
Varieties, gender of names of, 257. 
Vegetable kingdom, history of, dis- 
cussed, 140. 
Thalictrum clavatum, 39. 
Thalictrum Bichardsonii, 39. 
Tilia heterophylla, 37. 
Vegetation, aspects of North Ameri- 
can, 143, 261. 
Veratrum parviflorum, 48. 
Vienna, herbarium at, 18. 
Torrey, John, sketch of, 359. 
Torrey and Gray's Flora, 249. 
Torreya, distribution of, 149; genealogy 
of, 161 ; pilgrimage to, 189. 
Tortworth, the Chestnut of, 94. 
Wadsworth Oak, 97. 
Walker-Arnot, George A., sketch of, 
347. 
Ward, Nathaniel Bagshaw, sketch of, 
349. 
Trautvetteria palmata, 44. 
Trees, absence of, from the pampas, 
263 ; manner of determining tlieir 
age discussed, 84 ; manner of growth 
of, described, 80 ; of Canada and 
Great Britain contrasted, 266; the 
longevity of, 71. 
Webb, P. Barker, herbarium of, 16. 
Weed, definition of a, 234. 
Weeds of California, 241 ; of eastern 
North America, 241 ; origin of American, 
235 ; pertinacity and predominance 
of, 234. 
Troglodytes Gorilla, Wyman's paper 
Welwitsch, Frederick, sketch of, 358. 
White Pine, the, 107. 
on, 386. 
Trons, the Sycamore-Maple of, 89. 
Trumbull, J. H, letter on the Jerusa- 
Wight, Robert, sketch of, 356. 
Wistaria, 154. 
lem Artichoke, 198. 
Wright, Charles, sketch of, 468. 
Wyman, Jeffries, sketch of, 377. 
Tuckerman, Edward, sketch of, 491. 
Vaccinium Constablcei, 65. 
Vaccinium erythrocarpum, 45. 
Vaccinium macrocarpum, 167. 
Yew-trees, ancient, 103 ; of Fountains' 
Abbey, 104. 
Varieties, do they wear out or tend to 
Zigadenus glaucus, 49. 
wear out ? 174.        
11 1*1 
HW s<3_ j Z 
[ Wease retUrn pfom pecifle d tune. Y I  